fellow citizens of the senate and house of representatives : 
 in recurring to the internal situation of our country , since i had last the pleasure to address you , i find ample reason for a renewed expression of that gratitude to the ruler of the universe , which a continued series of prosperity has so often and so justly called forth .
the acts of the last session , which required special arrangements , have been , as far as circumstances would admit , carried into operation .
measures calculated to insure a continuance of the friendship of the indians , and to preserve peace along the extent of our interior frontier , have been digested and adopted .
in the framing of these , care has been taken to guard on the one hand , our advanced settlements from the predatory incursions of those unruly individuals , who can not be restrained by their tribes ; and on the other hand , to protect the rights secured to the indians by treaty ; to draw them nearer to the civilized state ; and inspire them with correct conceptions of the power , as well as justice of the government .
the meeting of the deputies from the creek nation at colerain , in the state of georgia , which had for a principal object the purchase of a parcel of their land , by that state , broke up without its being accomplished ; the nation having , previous to their departure , instructed them against making any sale ; the occasion however has been improved , to confirm by a new treaty with the creeks , their pre - existing engagements with the united states ; and to obtain their consent , to the establishment of trading houses and military posts within their boundary ; by means of which , their friendship , and the general peace , may be more effectually secured .
the period during the late session , at which the appropriation was passed , for carrying into effect the treaty of amity , commerce , and navigation , between the united states and his britannic majesty , necessarily procrastinated the reception of the posts stipulated to be delivered , beyond the date assigned for that event .
as soon however as the governor general of canada could be addressed with propriety on the subject , arrangements were cordially and promptly concluded for their evacuation ; and the united states took possession of the principal of them , comprehending oswego , niagara , detroit , michelimackina , and fort miami ; where , such repairs , and additions have been ordered to be made , as appeared indispensible .
the commissioners appointed on the part of the united states and of great britain , to determine which is the river st. croix , mentioned in the treaty of peace of 1783 , agreed in the choice of egbert benson esqr .
of new york , for the third commissioner .
the whole met at st. andrews , in passamaquoddy bay , in the beginning of october ; and directed surveys to be made of the rivers in dispute ; but deeming it impracticable to have these surveys completed before the next year , they adjourned , to meet at boston in august 1797 , for the final decision of the question .
other commissioners appointed on the part of the united states , agreeably to the seventh article of the treaty with great britain , relative to captures and condemnations of vessels and other property , met the commissioners of his britannic majesty in london , in august last , when john trumbull , esqr .
was chosen by lot , for the fifth commissioner .
in october following the board were to proceed to business .
as yet there has been no communication of commissioners on the part of great britain , to unite with those who have been appointed on the part of the united states , for carrying into effect the sixth article of the treaty .
the treaty with spain , required , that the commissioners for running the boundary line between the territory of the united states , and his catholic majesty 's provinces of east and west florida , should meet at the natchez , before the expiration of six months after the exchange of the ratifications , which was effected at aranjuez on the 25th .
day of april ; and the troops of his catholic majesty occupying any posts within the limits of the united states , were within the same period to be withdrawn .
the commissioner of the united states therefore , commenced his journey for the natchez in september ; and troops were ordered to occupy the posts from which the spanish garrisons should be withdrawn .
information has been recently received , of the appointment of a commissioner on the part of his catholic majesty for running the boundary line , but none of any appointment , for the adjustment of the claims of our citizens , whose vessels were captured by the armed vessels of spain .
in pursuance of the act of congress , passed in the last session , for the protection and relief of american seamen , agents were appointed , one to reside in great britain , and the other in the west indies .
the effects of the agency in the west indies , are not yet fully ascertained ; but those which have been communicated afford grounds to believe , the measure will be beneficial .
the agent destined to reside in great britain , declining to accept the appointment , the business has consequently devolved on the minister of the united states in london ; and will command his attention , until a new agent shall be appointed .
after many delays and disappointments , arising out of the european war , the final arrangements for fulfilling the engagements made to the dey and regency of algiers , will , in all present appearance , be crowned with success : but under great , tho ' inevitable disadvantages , in the pecuniary transactions , occasioned by that war ; which will render a further provision necessary .
the actual liberation of all our citizens who were prisoners in algiers , while it gratifies every feeling heart , is itself an earnest of a satisfactory termination of the whole negotiation .
measures are in operation for effecting treaties with the regencies of tunis and tripoli .
to an active external commerce , the protection of a naval force is indispensable .
this is manifest with regard to wars in which a state itself is a party .
but besides this , it is in our own experience , that the most sincere neutrality is not a sufficient guard against the depredations of nations at war .
to secure respect to a neutral flag , requires a naval force , organized , and ready to vindicate it , from insult or aggression .
this may even prevent the necessity of going to war , by discouraging belligerent powers from committing such violations of the rights of the neutral party , as may first or last , leave no other option .
from the best information i have been able to obtain , it would seem as if our trade to the mediterranean , without a protecting force , will always be insecure ; and our citizens exposed to the calamities from which numbers of them have but just been relieved .
these considerations invite the united states , to look to the means , and to set about the gradual creation of a navy .
the increasing progress of their navigation , promises them , at no distant period , the requisite supply of seamen ; and their means , in other respects , favour the undertaking .
it is an encouragement , likewise , that their particular situation , will give weight and influence to a moderate naval force in their hands .
will it not then be adviseable , to begin without delay , to provide , and lay up the materials for the building and equipping of ships of war ; and to proceed in the work by degrees , in proportion as our resources shall render it practicable without inconvenience ; so that a future war of europe , may not find our commerce in the same unprotected state , in which it was found by the present .
congress have repeatedly , and not without success , directed their attention to the encouragement of manufactures .
the object is of too much consequence , not to insure a continuance of their efforts , in every way which shall appear eligible .
as a general rule , manufactures on public account , are inexpedient .
but where the state of things in a country , leaves little hope that certain branches of manufacture will , for a great length of time obtain ; when these are of a nature essential to the furnishing and equipping of the public force in time of war , are not establishments for procuring them on public account , to the extent of the ordinary demand for the public service , recommended by strong considerations of national policy , as an exception to the general rule ?
ought our country to remain in such cases , dependant on foreign supply , precarious , because liable to be interrupted ?
if the necessary articles should , in this mode cost more in time of peace , will not the security and independence thence arising , form an ample compensation ?
establishments of this sort , commensurate only with the calls of the public service in time of peace , will , in time of war , easily be extended in proportion to the exigencies of the government ; and may even perhaps be made to yield a surplus for the supply of our citizens at large ; so as to mitigate the privations from the interruption of their trade .
if adopted , the plan ought to exclude all those branches which are already , or likely soon to be , established in the country ; in order that there may be no danger of interference with pursuits of individual industry .
it will not be doubted , that with reference either to individual , or national welfare , agriculture is of primary importance .
in proportion as nations advance in population , and other circumstances of maturity , this truth becomes more apparent ; and renders the cultivation of the soil more and more , an object of public patronage .
institutions for promoting it , grow up , supported by the public purse : and to what object can it be dedicated with greater propriety ?
among the means which have been employed to this end , none have been attended with greater success than the establishment of boards , composed of proper characters , charged with collecting and diffusing information , and enabled by premiums , and small pecuniary aids , to encourage and assist a spirit of discovery and improvement .
this species of establishment contributes doubly to the increase of improvement ; by stimulating to enterprise and experiment , and by drawing to a common centre , the results everywhere of individual skill and observation ; and spreading them thence over the whole nation .
experience accordingly has shewn , that they are very cheap instruments , of immense national benefits .
i have heretofore proposed to the consideration of congress , the expediency of establishing a national university ; and also a military academy .
the desirableness of both these institutions , has so constantly increased with every new view i have taken of the subject , that i can not omit the opportunity of once for all , recalling your attention to them .
the assembly to which i address myself , is too enlightened not to be fully sensible how much a flourishing state of the arts and sciences , contributes to national prosperity and reputation .
true it is , that our country , much to its honor , contains many seminaries of learning highly respectable and useful ; but the funds upon which they rest , are too narrow , to command the ablest professors , in the different departments of liberal knowledge , for the institution contemplated , though they would be excellent auxiliaries .
amongst the motives to such an institution , the assimilation of the principles , opinions and manners of our country men , but the common education of a portion of our youth from every quarter , well deserves attention .
the more homogeneous our citizens can be made in these particulars , the greater will be our prospect of permanent union ; and a primary object of such a national institution should be , the education of our youth in the science of government .
in a republic , what species of knowledge can be equally important ?
and what duty , more pressing on its legislature , than to patronize a plan for communicating it to those , who are to be the future guardians of the liberties of the country ?
the institution of a military academy , is also recommended by cogent reasons .
however pacific the general policy of a nation may be , it ought never to be without an adequate stock of military knowledge for emergencies .
the first would impair the energy of its character , and both would hazard its safety , or expose it to greater evils when war could not be avoided .
besides that war , might often , not depend upon its own choice .
in proportion , as the observance of pacific maxims , might exempt a nation from the necessity of practising the rules of the military art , ought to be its care in preserving , and transmitting by proper establishments , the knowledge of that art .
whatever argument may be drawn from particular examples , superficially viewed , a thorough examination of the subject will evince , that the art of war , is at once comprehensive and complicated ; that it demands much previous study ; and that the possession of it , in its most improved and perfect state , is always of great moment to the security of a nation .
this , therefore , ought to be a serious care of every government : and for this purpose , an academy , where a regular course of instruction is given , is an obvious expedient , which different nations have successfully employed .
the compensations to the officers of the united states , in various instances , and in none more than in respect to the most important stations , appear to call for legislative revision .
the consequences of a defective provision , are of serious import to the government .
if private wealth , is to supply the defect of public retribution , it will greatly contract the sphere within which , the selection of characters for office , is to be made , and will proportionally diminish the probability of a choice of men , able , as well as upright : besides that it would be repugnant to the vital principles of our government , virtually to exclude from public trusts , talents and virtue , unless accompanied by wealth .
while in our external relations , some serious inconveniences and embarrassments have been overcome , and others lessened , it is with much pain and deep regret i mention , that circumstances of a very unwelcome nature , have lately occurred .
our trade has suffered , and is suffering , extensive injuries in the west indies , from the cruisers , and agents of the french republic ; and communications have been received from its minister here , which indicate the danger of a further disturbance of our commerce , by its authority ; and which are , in other respects , far from agreeable .
it has been my constant , sincere , and earnest wish , in conformity with that of our nation , to maintain cordial harmony , and a perfectly friendly understanding with that republic .
this wish remains unabated ; and i shall persevere in the endeavour to fulfil it , to the utmost extent of what shall be consistent with a just , and indispensable regard to the rights and honour of our country ; nor will i easily cease to cherish the expectation , that a spirit of justice , candour and friendship , on the part of the republic , will eventually ensure success .
in pursuing this course however , i can not forget what is due to the character of our government and nation ; or to a full and entire confidence in the good sense , patriotism , selfrespect , and fortitude of my countrymen .
i reserve for a special message a more particular communication on this interesting subject .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : i have directed an estimate of the appropriations , necessary for the service of the ensuing year , to be submitted from the proper department ; with a view of the public receipts and expenditures , to the latest period to which an account can be prepared .
it is with satisfaction i am able to inform you , that the revenues of the united states continue in a state of progressive improvement .
a reinforcement of the existing provisions for discharging our public debt , was mentioned in my address at the opening of the last session .
some preliminary steps were taken towards it , the maturing of which will , no doubt , engage your zealous attention during the present .
i will only add , that it will afford me , heart felt satisfaction , to concur in such further measures , as will ascertain to our country the prospect of a speedy extinguishment of the debt .
posterity may have cause to regret , if , from any motive , intervals of tranquillity are left unimproved for accelerating this valuable end .
gentlemen of the senate , and of the house of representatives : my solicitude to see the militia of the united states placed on an efficient establishment , has been so often , and so ardently expressed , that i shall but barely recall the subject to your view on the present occasion ; at the same time that i shall submit to your enquiry , whether our harbours are yet sufficiently secured .
the situation in which i now stand , for the last time , in the midst of the representatives of the people of the united states , naturally recalls the period when the administration of the present form of government commenced ; and i can not omit the occasion , to congratulate you and my country , on the success of the experiment ; nor to repeat my fervent supplications to the supreme ruler of the universe , and sovereign arbiter of nations , that his providential care may still be extended to the united states ; that the virtue and happiness of the people , may be preserved ; and that the government , which they have instituted , for the protection of their liberties , maybe perpetual .

gentlemen of the house of representatives : i have maturely considered the act passed by the two houses , intitled , " an act for an apportionment of representatives among the several states according to the first enumeration , " 44 and i return it to your house , wherein it originated , with the following objections .
first : the constitution has prescribed that representatives shall be apportioned among the several states , according to their respective numbers : and there is no one proportion or division which , applied to the respective numbers of the states , will yield the number and allotment of representatives proposed by the bill .
second .
the constitution has also provided that the number of representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand : which restriction is , by the context , and by fair and obvious construction , to be applied to the seperate and respective numbers of the states : and the bill has allotted to eight of the states more than one for thirty thousand .

whereas it is the duty of all nations to acknowledge the providence of almighty god , to obey his will , to be grateful for his benefits , and humbly to implore his protection and favor , and whereas both houses of congress have by their joint committee requested me " to recommend to the people of the united states a day of public thanks - giving and prayer to be observed by acknowledging with grateful hearts the many signal favors of almighty god , especially by affording them an opportunity peaceably to establish a form of government for their safety and happiness . "
now therefore i do recommend and assign thursday the 26th day of november next to be devoted by the people of these states to the service of that great and glorious being , who is the beneficent author of all the good that was , that is , or that will be .
that we may then all unite in rendering unto him our sincere and humble thanks , for his kind care and protection of the people of this country previous to their becoming a nation , for the signal and manifold mercies , and the favorable interpositions of his providence , which we experienced in the course and conclusion of the late war , for the great degree of tranquillity , union , and plenty , which we have since enjoyed , for the peaceable and rational manner in which we have been enabled to establish constitutions of government for our safety and happiness , and particularly the national one now lately instituted , for the civil and religious liberty with which we are blessed , and the means we have of acquiring and diffusing useful knowledge and in general for all the great and various favors which he hath been pleased to confer upon us .
and also that we may then unite in most humbly offering our prayers and supplications to the great lord and ruler of nations and beseech him to pardon our national and other transgressions , to enable us all , whether in public or private stations , to perform our several and relative duties properly and punctually , to render our national government a blessing to all the people , by constantly being a government of wise , just and constitutional laws , discreetly and faithfully executed and obeyed , to protect and guide all sovereigns and nations ( especially such as have shown kindness unto us ) and to bless them with good government , peace , and concord .
to promote the knowledge and practice of true religion and virtue , and the encrease of science among them and us , and generally to grant unto all mankind such a degree of temporal prosperity as he alone knows to be best .

fellow - citizens of the senate , and of the house of representatives : 
 it is some abatement of the satisfaction , with which i meet you on the present occasion , that in felicitating you on a continuance of the national prosperity , generally , i am not able to add to it information that the indian hostilities , which have for some time past distressed our north western frontier , have terminated .
you will , i am persuaded , learn , with no less concern than i communicate it , that reiterated endeavors , toward effecting a pacification , have hitherto issued only in new and outrageous proofs of persevering hostility , on the part of the tribes with whom we are in contest .
an earnest desire to procure tranquillity to the frontier ; to stop the further effusion of blood ; to arrest the progress of expense ; to forward the prevalent wish of the nation , for peace , has led , through various channels , to strenuous efforts , to accomplish these desirable purposes : in making which efforts , i consulted less my own anticipations of the event , or the scruples , which some considerations were calculated to inspire , than the wish to find the object attainable ; or if not attainable , to ascertain unequivocally that such is the case .
a detail of the measures , which have been pursued , and of their consequences , which will be laid before you , while it will confirm to you the want of success , thus far , will , i trust , evince that means as proper and as efficacious as could have been devised , have been employed .
the issue of some of them , indeed , is still depending ; but a favourable one , though not to be despaired of , is not promised by anything that has yet happened .
in the course of the attempts which have been made , some valuable citizens have fallen victims to their zeal for the public service .
a sanction commonly respected even among savages , has been found , in this instance , insufficient to protect from massacre the emissaries of peace .
it will , i presume , be duly considered whether the occasion does not call for an exercise of liberality towards the families of the deceased .
it must add to your concern , to be informed , that besides the continuation of hostile appearances among the tribes north of the ohio , some threatening symptoms have of late been revived among some of those south of it .
a part of the cherokees , known by the name of chickamagas , inhabitating five villages on the tennesee river , have been long in the practice of committing depredations on the neighbouring settlements .
it was hoped that the treaty of holstin , made with the cherokee nation in july 1791 , would have prevented a repetition of such depredations .
but the event has not answered this hope .
the chickamagas , aided by some banditti of another tribe in their vicinity , have recently perpetrated wanton and unprovoked hostilities upon the citizens of the united states in that quarter .
the information which has been received on this subject will be laid before you .
hitherto defensive precautions only have been strictly enjoined and observed .
it is not understood that any breach of treaty , or aggression whatsoever , on the part of the united states , or their citizens , is even alleged as a pretext for the spirit of hostility in this quarter .
i have reason to believe that every practicable exertion has been made ( pursuant to the provision by law for that purpose ) to be prepared for the alternative of a prosecution of the war , in the event of a failure of pacific overtures .
a large proportion of the troops authorized to be raised , has been recruited , though the number is still incomplete .
and pains have been taken to discipline and put them in condition for the particular kind of service to be performed .
a delay of operations ( besides being dictated by the measures which were pursuing towards a pacific termination of the war ) has been in itself deemed preferable to immature efforts .
a statement from the proper department with regard to the number of troops raised , and some other points which have been suggested , will afford more precise information , as a guide to the legislative consultations ; and among other things will enable congress to judge whether some additional stimulus to the recruiting service may not be adviseable .
in looking forward to the future expense of the operations , which may be found inevitable , i derive consolation from the information i receive , that the product of the revenues for the present year , is likely to supersede the necessity of additional burthens on the community , for the service of the ensuing year .
this , however , will be better ascertained in the course of the session ; and it is proper to add , that the information alluded to proceeds upon the supposition of no material extension of the spirit of hostility .
i can not dismiss the subject of indian affairs without again recommending to your consideration the expediency of more adequate provision for giving energy to the laws throughout our interior frontier , and for restraining the commission of outrages upon the indians ; without which all pacific plans must prove nugatory .
to enable , by competent rewards , the employment of qualified and trusty persons to reside among them , as agents , would also contribute to the preservation of peace and good neighbourhood .
if , in addition to these expedients , an eligible plan could be devised for promoting civilization among the friendly tribes , and for carrying on trade with them , upon a scale equal to their wants , and under regulations calculated to protect them from imposition and extortion , its influence in cementing their interests with our 's could not but be considerable .
the prosperous state of our revenue has been intimated .
this would be still more the case , were it not for the impediments , which in some places continue to embarrass the collection of the duties on spirits distilled within the united states .
these impediments have lessened , and are lessening in local extent , and as applied to the community at large , the contentment with the law appears to be progressive .
but symptoms of increased opposition having lately manifested themselves in certain quarters , i judged a special interposition on my part , proper and adviseable ; and under this impression , have issued a proclamation , warning against all unlawful combinations and proceedings , having for their object or tending to obstruct the operation of the law in question , and announcing that all lawful ways and means would be strictly put in execution for bringing to justice the infractors thereof , and securing obedience thereto .
measures have also been taken for the prosecution of offenders : and congress may be assured , that nothing within constitutional and legal limits , which may depend on me , shall be wanting to assert and maintain the just authority of the laws .
in fulfilling this trust , i shall count intirely upon the full cooperation of the other departments of government , and upon the zealous support of all good citizens .
i can not forbear to bring again into the view of the legislature the subject of a revision of the judiciary system .
a representation from the judges of the supreme court , which will be laid before you , points out some of the inconveniences that are experienced .
in the course of the execution of the laws , considerations arise out of the structure of that system , which , in some cases , tend to relax their efficacy .
as connected with this subject , provisions to facilitate the taking of bail upon processes out of the courts of the united states , and supplementary definition of offences against the constitution and laws of the union , and of the punishment for such offences , will , it is presumed , be found worthy of particular attention .
observations on the value of peace with other nations are unnecessary .
it would be wise , however , by timely provisions , to guard against those acts of our own citizens , which might tend to disturb it , and to put ourselves in a condition to give that satisfaction to foreign nations which we may sometimes have occasion to require from them .
i particularly recommend to your consideration the means of preventing those aggressions by our citizens on the territory of other nations , and other infractions of the law of nations , which , furnishing just subject of complaint , might endanger our peace with them .
and in general , the maintenance of a friendly intercourse with foreign powers will be presented to your attention by the expiration of the law for that purpose , which takes place if not renewed , at the close of the present session .
in execution of the authority given by the legislature , measures have been taken for engaging some artists from abroad to aid in the establishment of our mint ; others have been employed at home .
provision has been made for the requisite buildings , and these are now putting into proper condition for the purposes of the establishment .
there has also been a small beginning in the coinage of half - dismes ; the want of small coins in circulation calling the first attention to them .
the regulation of foreign coins in correspondency with the principles of our national coinage , as being essential to their due operation , and to order in our money concerns , will , i doubt not , be resumed and completed .
it is represented that some provisions in the law , which establishes the post - office , operate , in experiment , against the transmission of newspapers to distant parts of the country .
should this , upon due inquiry , be found to be the case , a full conviction of the importance of facilitating the circulation of political intelligence and information , will , i doubt not , lead to the application of a remedy .
15 
 [ note : on december 31 lear wrote to the postmaster general : " in reply to your letter of this date requesting me to inform you of the facts or representations communicated to the president relative to newspapers , which led him to notice them in his speech at the opening of the present session of congress ; i have the honor to inform you that it was represented to the president in such a way as to place the fact beyond a doubt in his mind , that in consequence of the rate of postage imposed on the transmission of newspapers by the post - office law , many persons in virginia who had heretofore taken newspapers from this city , had declined receiving them any longer ; and that many others declared that they only continued to take them under a full persuasion that the rate of postage would be reduced during the present session of congress , and that if such reduction should not take place , they would desire the printers to stop their papers .
" in addition to these strong marks of disapprobation of the rate of postage on newspapers given by individuals , he was informed that the public mind , so far as it had been expressed in that quarter on the subject , appeared very anxious that an alteration should take place in that part of the post office law which relates to the transmission of newspapers . "
this letter is entered in the " letter book " in the washington papers . ]
the adoption of a constitution for the state of kentucky has been notified to me .
the legislature will share with me in the satisfaction which arises from an event interesting to the happiness of the part of the nation to which it relates , and conducive to the general order .
it is proper likewise to inform you , that since my last communication on the subject , and in further execution of the acts severally making provision for the public debt , and for the reduction thereof , three new loans have been effected , each for three millions of florins .
one at antwerp , at the annual interest of four and one half per cent , with an allowance of four per cent in lieu of all charges ; and the other two at amsterdam , at the annual interest of four per cent , with an allowance of five and one half per cent in one case , and of five per cent in the other in lieu of all charges .
the rates of these loans , and the circumstances under which they have been made , are confirmations of the high state of our credit abroad .
among the objects to which these funds have been directed to be applied , the payment of the debts due to certain foreign officers , according to the provision made during the last session , has been embraced .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : i entertain a strong hope that the state of the national finances is now sufficiently matured to enable you to enter upon a systematic and effectual arrangement for the regular redemption and discharge of the public debt , according to the right which has been reserved served to the government .
no measure can be more desireable , whether viewed with an eye to its intrinsic importance , or to the general sentiment and wish of the nation .
provision is likewise requisite for the reimbursement of the loan which has been made for the bank of the united states , pursuant to the eleventh section of the act by which it is incorporated .
in fulfilling the public stipulations in this particular , it is expected a valuable saving will be made .
appropriations for the current service of the ensuing year , and for such extraordinaries as may require provision , will demand , and , i doubt not , will engage your early attention .
gentlemen of the senate and of the house of representatives : i content myself with recalling your attention , generally , to such objects , not particularized in my present , as have been suggested in my former communications to you .
various temporary laws will expire during the present session .
among these , that which regulates trade and intercourse with the indian tribes , will merit particular notice .
the results of your common deliberations , hitherto , will , i trust , be productive of solid and durable advantages to our constituents ; such as , by conciliating more and more their ultimate suffrage , will tend to strengthen and confirm their attachment to that constitution of government , upon which , under divine providence , materially depend their union , their safety and their happiness .
still further to promote and secure these inestimable ends , there is nothing which can have a more powerful tendency , than the careful cultivation of harmony , combined with a due regard to stability , in the public councils .

fellow citizens of the senate and house of representatives : in meeting you again i feel much satisfaction in being able to repeat my congratulations on the favorable prospects which continue to distinguish our public affairs .
the abundant fruits of another year have blessed our country with plenty , and with the means of a flourishing commerce .
the progress of public credit is witnessed by a considerable rise of american stock abroad as well as at home .
and the revenues allotted for this and other national purposes , have been productive beyond the calculations by which they were regulated .
this latter circumstance is the more pleasing as it is not only a proof of the fertility of our resources , but as it assures us of a further increase of the national respectability and credit ; and let me add , as it bears an honorable testimony to the patriotism and integrity of the mercantile and marine part of our citizens .
the punctuality of the former in discharging their engagements has been exemplary .
in conforming to the powers vested in me by acts of the last session , a loan of three millions of florins , towards which some provisional measures had previously taken place , has been completed in holland .
as well the celerity with which it has been filled , as the nature of the terms , ( considering the more than ordinary demand for borrowing created by the situation of europe ) gives a reasonable hope that the further execution of those powers may proceed with advantage and success .
the secretary of the treasury has my directions to communicate such further particulars as may be requisite for more precise information .
since your last sessions , i have received communications by which it appears , that the district of kentucky , at present a part of virginia , has concurred in certain propositions contained in a law of that state ; in consequence of which the district is to become a distinct member of the union , in case the requisite sanction of congress be added .
for this sanction application is now made .
i shall cause the papers on this very important transaction to be laid before you .
the liberality and harmony , with which it has been conducted will be found to do great honor to both the parties ; and the sentiments of warm attachment to the union and its present government expressed by our fellow citizens of kentucky can not fail to add an affectionate concern for their particular welfare to the great national impressions under which you will decide on the case submitted to you .
it has been heretofore known to congress , that frequent incursions have been made on our frontier settlements by certain banditti of indians from the north west side of the ohio .
these with some of the tribes dwelling on and near the wabash have of late been particularly active in their depredations ; and being emboldened by the impunity of their crimes , and aided by such parts of the neighboring tribes as could be seduced to join in their hostilities or afford them a retreat for their prisoners and plunder , they have , instead of listening to the humane overtures92 made on the part of the united states , renewed their violences with fresh alacrity and greater effect .
the lives of a number of valuable citizens have thus been sacrificed , and some of them under circumstances peculiarly shocking ; whilst others have been carried into a deplorable captivity .
these aggravated provocations rendered it essential to the safety of the western settlements that the aggressors should be made sensible that the government of the union is not less capable of punishing their crimes , than it is disposed to respect their rights and reward their attachments .
as this object could not be effected by defensive measures it became necessary to put in force the act , which empowers the president to call out the militia for the protection of the frontiers .
and i have accordingly authorized an expedition in which the regular troops in that quarter are combined with such drafts of militia as were deemed sufficient .
the event of the measure is yet unknown to me .
the secretary of war is directed to lay before you a statement of the information on which it is founded , as well as an estimate of the expence with which it will be attended .
the disturbed situation of europe , and particularly the critical posture of the great maritime powers , whilst it ought to make us more thankful for the general peace and security enjoyed by the united states , reminds us at the same time of the circumspection with which it becomes us to preserve these blessings .
it requires also that we should not overlook the tendency of a war and even of preparations for a war , among the nations most concerned in active commerce with this country , to abridge the means , and thereby at least enhance the price of transporting its valuable productions to their proper markets .
i recommend it to your serious reflexion how far and in what mode , it may be expedient to guard against embarrassments from these contingencies , by such encouragements to our own navigation as will render our commerce and agriculture less dependent on foreign bottoms , which may fail us in the very moments most interesting to both of these great objects .
our fisheries , and the transportation of our own produce offer us abundant means for guarding ourselves against this evil .
your attention seems to be not less due to that particular branch of our trade which belongs to the mediterranean .
so many circumstances unite in rendering the present state of it distressful to us , that you will not think any deliberations misemployed , which may lead to its relief and protection .
the laws you have already passed for the establishment of a judiciary system have opened the doors of justice to all descriptions of persons .
you will consider in your wisdom , whether improvements in that system may yet be made ; and particularly whether a uniform process of execution on sentences issuing , from the federal courts be not desireable through all the states .
the patronage of our commerce , of our merchants and seamen , has called for the appointment of consuls in foreign countries .
it seems expedient to regulate by law the exercise of that jurisdiction and those functions which are permitted them , either by express convention , or by a friendly indulgence in the places of their residence .
the consular convention too with his most christian majesty has stipulated in certain cases , the aid of the national authority to his consuls established here .
some legislative provision is requisite to carry these stipulations into full effect .
the establishment of the militia ; of a mint ; of standards of weights and measures ; of the post office and post roads are subjects which ( i presume ) you will resume of course , and which are abundantly urged by their own importance .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : the sufficiency of the revenues you have established for the objects to which they are appropriated , leaves no doubt that the residuary provisions will be commensurate to the other objects for which the public faith stands now pledged .
allow me , moreover , to hope that it will be a favorite policy with you not merely to secure a payment of the interest of the debt funded , but , as far and as fast as [ the ] growing resources of the country will permit , to exonerate it of the principal itself .
the appropriation you have made of the western lands explains your dispositions on this subject : and i am persuaded the sooner that valuable fund can be made to contribute along with other means to the actual reduction of the public debt , the more salutary will the measure be to every public interest , as well as the more satisfactory to our constituents .
gentlemen of the senate and house of representatives : in pursuing the various and weighty business of the present session i indulge the fullest persuasion that your consultations will be equally marked with wisdom , and animated by the love of your country .
in whatever belongs to my duty , you shall have all the cooperation which an undiminished zeal for its welfare can inspire .
it will be happy for us both , and our best reward , if by a successful administration of our respective trusts we can make the established government more and more instrumental in promoting the good of our fellow citizens , and more and more the object of their attachment and confidence .

whereas combinations to defeat the execution of the laws laying duties upon spirits distilled within the united states and upon stills have from the time of the commencement of those laws existed in some of the western parts of pennsylvania ; and 
 whereas the said combinations , proceeding in a manner subversive equally of the just authority of government and of the rights of individuals , have hitherto effected their dangerous and criminal purpose by the influence of certain irregular meetings whose proceedings have tended to encourage and uphold the spirit of opposition by misrepresentations of the laws calculated to render them odious ; by endeavors to deter those who might be so disposed from accepting offices under them through fear of public resentment and of injury to person and property , and to compel those who had accepted such offices by actual violence to surrender or forbear the execution of them ; by circulating vindictive menaces against all those who should otherwise , directly or indirectly , aid in the execution of the said laws , or who , yielding to the dictates of conscience and to a sense of obligation , should themselves comply therewith ; by actually injuring and destroying the property of persons who were understood to have so complied ; by inflicting cruel and humiliating punishments upon private citizens for no other cause than that of appearing to be the friends of the laws ; by intercepting the public officers on the highways , abusing , assaulting , and otherwise ill treating them ; by going to their houses in the night , gaining admittance by force , taking away their papers , and committing other outrages , employing for these unwarrantable purposes the agency of armed banditti disguised in such manner as for the most part to escape discovery ; and 
 whereas the endeavors of the legislature to obviate objections to the said laws by lowering the duties and by other alterations conducive to the convenience of those whom they immediately affect ( though they have given satisfaction in other quarters ) , and the endeavors of the executive officers to conciliate a compliance with the laws by explanations , by forbearance , and even by particular accommodations rounded on the suggestion of local considerations , have been disappointed of their effect by the machinations of persons whose industry to excite resistance has increased with every appearance of a disposition among the people to relax in their opposition and to acquiesce in the laws , insomuch that many persons in the said western parts of pennsylvania have at length been hardy enough to perpetrate acts which i am advised amount to treason , being overt acts of levying war against the united states , the said persons having on the 16th and 17th july last past proceeded in arms ( on the second day amounting to several hundreds ) to the house of john neville , inspector of the revenue for the fourth survey of the district of pennsylvania ; having repeatedly attacked the said house with the persons therein , wounding some of them ; having seized david lenox , marshal of the district of pennsylvania , who previous thereto had been fired upon while in the execution of his duty by a party of armed men , detaining him for some time prisoner , till for the preservation of his life and the obtaining of his liberty he found it necessary to enter into stipulations to forbear the execution of certain official duties touching processes issuing out of a court of the united states ; and having finally obliged the said inspector of the said revenue and the said marshal from considerations of personal safety to fly from that part of the country , in order , by a circuitous route , to proceed to the seat of government , avowing as the motives of these outrageous proceedings an intention to prevent by force of arms the execution of the said laws , to oblige the said inspector of the revenue to renounce his said office , to withstand by open violence the lawful authority of the government of the united states , and to compel thereby an alteration in the measures of the legislature and a repeal of the laws aforesaid ; and 
 whereas by a law of the united states entitled " an act to provide calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union , suppress insurrections , and repel invasions , " it is enacted " that whenever the laws of the united states shall be opposed or the execution thereof obstructed in any state by combinations too powerful to be suppressed by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings or by the powers vested in the marshals by that act , the same being notified by an associate justice or the district judge , it shall be lawful for the president of the united states to call forth the militia of such state to suppress such combinations and to cause the laws to be duly executed .
and if the militia of a state where such combinations may happen shall refuse or be insufficient to suppress the same , it shall be lawful for the president , if the legislature of the united states shall not be in session , to call forth and employ such numbers of the militia of any other state or states most convenient thereto as may be necessary ; and the use of the militia so to be called forth may be continued , if necessary , until the expiration of thirty days after the commencement of the ensuing session : provided always , that whenever it may be necessary in the judgment of the president to use the military force hereby directed to be called forth , the president shall forthwith , and previous thereto , by proclamation , command such insurgents to disperse and retire peaceably to their respective abodes within a limited time ; " and 
 whereas james wilson , an associate justice , on the 4th instant , by writing under his hand , did from evidence which had been laid before him notify to me that " in the counties of washington and allegany , in pennsylvania , laws of the united states are opposed and the execution thereof obstructed by combinations too powerful to be suppressed by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings or by the powers vested in the marshal of that district ; " and 
 whereas it is in my judgment necessary under the circumstances of the case to take measures for calling forth the militia in order to suppress the combinations aforesaid , and to cause the laws to be duly executed ; and i have accordingly determined so to do , feeling the deepest regret for the occasion , but withal the most solemn conviction that the essential interests of the union demand it , that the very existence of government and the fundamental principles of social order are materially involved in the issue , and that the patriotism and firmness of all good citizens are seriously called upon , as occasions may require , to aid in the effectual suppression of so fatal a spirit : 
 wherefore , and in pursuance of the proviso above recited , i , george washington , president of the united states , do hereby command all persons being insurgents as aforesaid , and all others whom it may concern , on or before the 1st day of september next to disperse and retire peaceably to their respective abodes .
and i do moreover warn all persons whomsoever against aiding , abetting , or comforting the perpetrators of the aforesaid treasonable acts , and do require all officers and other citizens , according to their respective duties and the laws of the land , to exert their utmost endeavors to prevent and suppress such dangerous proceedings .
in testimony whereof i have caused the seal of the united states of america to be affixed to these presents , and signed the same with my hand .
done at the city of philadelphia , the 7th day of august , 1794 , and of the independence of the united states of america the nineteenth .
go .
washington .
by the president : 
 edm : randolpf
gentlemen of the house of representatives : 
 with the utmost attention i have considered your resolution of the 24th .
instant , requesting me to lay before your house , a copy of the instructions to the minister of the united states who negotiated the treaty with the king of great britain , together with the correspondence and other documents relative to that treaty , excepting such of the said papers as any existing negotiation may render improper to be disclosed .
in deliberating upon this subject , it was impossible for me to lose sight of the principle which some have avowed in its discussion ; or to avoid extending my views to the consequences which must flow from the admission of that principle .
i trust that no part of my conduct has ever indicated a disposition to withhold any information which the constitution has enjoined upon the president as a duty to give , or which could be required of him by either house of congress as a right ; and with truth i affirm , that it has been , as it will continue to be , while i have the honor to preside in the government , my constant endeavour to harmonize with the other branches thereof ; so far as the trust delegated to me by the people of the united states , and my sense of the obligation it imposes to " preserve , protect and defend the constitution " will permit .
the nature of foreign negotiations requires caution ; and their success must often depend on secrecy : and even when brought to a conclusion , a full disclosure of all the measures , demands , or eventual concessions , which may have been proposed or contemplated , would be extremely impolitic : for this might have a pernicious influence on future negotiations ; or produce immediate inconveniences , perhaps danger and mischief , in relation to other powers .
the necessity of such caution and secrecy was one cogent reason for vesting the power of making treaties in the president , with the advice and consent of the senate , the principle on which that body was formed confining it to a small number of members .
to admit then a right in the house of representatives to demand , and to have as a matter of course , all the papers respecting a negotiation with a foreign power , would be to establish a dangerous precedent .
it does not occur that the inspection of the papers asked for , be relative to any purpose under the cognizance of the house of representatives , except that of an impeachment , which the resolution has not expressed .
i repeat , that i have no disposition to withhold any information which the duty of my station will permit , or the public good shall require to be disclosed : and in fact , all the papers affecting the negotiation with great britain were laid before the senate , when the treaty itself was communicated for their consideration and advice .
the course which the debate has taken , on the resolution of the house , leads to some observations on the mode of making treaties under the constitution of the united states .
having been a member of the general convention , and knowing the principles on which the constitution was formed , i have ever entertained but one opinion on this subject ; and from the first establishment of the government to this moment , my conduct has exemplified that opinion , that the power of making treaties is exclusively vested in the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate , provided two thirds of the senators present concur , and that every treaty so made , and promulgated , thenceforward became the law of the land .
it is thus that the treaty making power has been understood by foreign nations : and in all the treaties made with them , we have declared , and they have believed , that when ratified by the president with the advice and consent of the senate , they became obligatory .
in this construction of the constitution every house of representatives has heretofore acquiesced ; and until the present time , not a doubt or suspicion has appeared to my knowledge that this construction was not the true one .
nay , they have more than acquiesced : for till now , without controverting the obligation of such treaties , they have made all the requisite provisions for carrying them into effect .
there is also reason to believe that this construction agrees with the opinions entertained by the state conventions , when they were deliberating on the constitution ; especially by those who objected to it , because there was not required , in commercial treaties , the consent of two thirds of the whole number of the members of the senate , instead of two thirds of the senators present ; and because in treaties respecting territorial and certain other rights and claims , the concurrence of three fourths of the whole number of the members of both houses respectively , was not made necessary .
it is a fact declared by the general convention , and universally understood , that the constitution of the united states was the result of a spirit of amity and mutual concession .
and it is well known that under this influence the smaller states were admitted to an equal representation in the senate with the larger states ; and that this branch of the government was invested with great powers : for on the equal participation of those powers , the sovereignty and political safety of the smaller states were deemed essentially to depend .
if other proofs than these , and the plain letter of the constitution itself , be necessary to ascertain the point under consideration , they may be found in the journals of the general convention , which i have deposited in the office of the department of state .
in these journals it will appear that a proposition was made , " that no treaty should be binding on the united states which was not ratified by a law " ; and that the proposition was explicitly rejected .
as therefore it is perfectly clear to my understanding , that file assent of the house of representatives is not necessary to the validity of a treaty : as the treaty with great britain exhibits in itself all the objects requiring legislative provision ; and on these the papers called for can throw no light : and as it is essential to the due administration of the government , that the boundaries fixed by the constitution between the different departments should be preserved : a just regard to the constitution and to the duty of my office , under all the circumstances of this case , forbids a complyance with your request .

the period for a new election of a citizen to administer the executive government of the united states being not far distant , and the time actually arrived when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person who is to be clothed with that important trust , it appears to me proper , especially as it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice , that i should now apprise you of the resolution i have formed to decline being considered among the number of those out of whom a choice is to be made .
i beg you at the same time to do me the justice to be assured that this resolution has not been taken without a strict regard to all the considerations appertaining to the relation which binds a dutiful citizen to his country ; and that in withdrawing the tender of service , which silence in my situation might imply , i am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future interest , no deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness , but am supported by a full conviction that the step is compatible with both .
the acceptance of and continuance hitherto in the office to which your suffrages have twice called me have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to the opinion of duty and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire .
i constantly hoped that it would have been much earlier in my power , consistently with motives which i was not at liberty to disregard , to return to that retirement from which i had been reluctantly drawn .
the strength of my inclination to do this previous to the last election had even led to the preparation of an address to declare it to you ; but mature reflection on the then perplexed and critical posture of our affairs with foreign nations and the unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence impelled me to abandon the idea .
i rejoice that the state of your concerns , external as well as internal , no longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of duty or propriety , and am persuaded , whatever partiality may be retained for my services , that in the present circumstances of our country you will not disapprove my determination to retire .
the impressions with which i first undertook the arduous trust were explained on the proper occasion .
in the discharge of this trust i will only say that i have , with good intentions , contributed toward the organization and administration of the government the best exertions of which a very fallible judgment was capable , not unconscious in the outset of the inferiority of my qualifications , experience in my own eyes , perhaps still more in the eyes of others , has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself ; and every day the increasing weight of years admonishes me more and more that the shade of retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome .
satisfied that if any circumstances have given peculiar value to my services they were temporary , i have the consolation to believe that , while choice and prudence invite me to quit the political scene , patriotism does not forbid it .
in looking forward to the moment which is intended to terminate the career of my political life my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment of that debt of gratitude which i owe to my beloved country for the many honors it has conferred upon me ; still more for the steadfast confidence with which it has supported me , and for the opportunities i have thence enjoyed of manifesting my inviolable attachment by services faithful and persevering , though in usefulness unequal to my zeal .
if benefits have resulted to our country from these services , let it always be remembered to your praise and as an instructive example in our annals that under circumstances in which the passions , agitated in every direction , were liable to mislead ; amidst appearances sometimes dubious ; vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging ; in situations in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the spirit of criticism , the constancy of your support was the essential prop of the efforts and a guaranty of the plans by which they were effected .
profoundly penetrated with this idea , i shall carry it with me to my grave as a strong incitement to unceasing vows that heaven may continue to you the choicest tokens of its beneficence ; that your union and brotherly affection may be perpetual ; that the free constitution which is the work of your hands may be sacredly maintained ; that its administration in every department may be stamped with wisdom and virtue ; that , in fine , the happiness of the people of these states , under the auspices of liberty , may be made complete by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause , the affection , and adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it .
here , perhaps , i ought to stop .
but a solicitude for your welfare which can not end but with my life , and the apprehension of danger natural to that solicitude , urge me on an occasion like the present to offer to your solemn contemplation and to recommend to your frequent review some sentiments which are the result of much reflection , of no inconsiderable observation , and which appear to me all important to the permanency of your felicity as a people .
these will be offered to you with the more freedom as you can only see in them the disinterested warnings of a parting friend , who can possibly have no personal motive to bias his counsel .
nor can i forget as an encouragement to it your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former and not dissimilar occasion .
interwoven as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts , no recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or confirm the attachment .
the unity of government which constitutes you one people is also now dear to you .
it is justly so , for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real independence , the support of your tranquillity at home , your peace abroad , of your safety , of your prosperity , of that very liberty which you so highly prize .
but as it is easy to foresee that from different causes and from different quarters much pains will be taken , many artifices employed , to weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth , as this is the point in your political fortress against which the batteries of internal and external enemies will be most constantly and actively ( though often covertly and insidiously ) directed , it is of infinite moment that you should properly estimate the immense value of your national union to your collective and individual happiness ; that you should cherish a cordial , habitual , and immovable attachment to it ; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as of the palladium of your political safety and prosperity ; watching for its preservation with jealous anxiety ; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned , and indignantly frowning upon the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from the rest or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various parts .
for this you have every inducement of sympathy and interest .
citizens by birth or choice of a common country , that country has a right to concentrate your affections .
the name of american , which belongs to you in your national capacity , must always exalt the just pride of patriotism more than any appellation derived from local discriminations .
with slight shades of difference , you have the same religion , manners , habits , and political principles .
you have in a common cause fought and triumphed together .
the independence and liberty you possess are the work of joint councils and joint efforts , of common dangers , sufferings , and successes .
but these considerations , however powerfully they address themselves to your sensibility , are greatly outweighed by those which apply more immediately to your interest .
here every portion of our country finds the most commanding motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole .
the north , in an unrestrained intercourse with the south , protected by the equal laws of a common government , finds in the productions of the latter great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise and precious materials of manufacturing industry .
the south , in the same intercourse , benefiting by the same agency of the north , sees its agriculture grow and its commerce expand .
turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the north , it finds its particular navigation invigorated ; and while it contributes in different ways to nourish and increase the general mass of the national navigation , it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength to which itself is unequally adapted .
the east , in a like intercourse with the west , already finds , and in the progressive improvement of interior communications by land and water will more and more find , a valuable vent for the commodities which it brings from abroad or manufactures at home .
the west derives from the east supplies requisite to its growth and comfort , and what is perhaps of still greater consequence , it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weight , influence , and the future maritime strength of the atlantic side of the union , directed by an indissoluble community of interest as one nation .
any other tenure by which the west can hold this essential advantage , whether derived from its own separate strength or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any foreign power , must be intrinsically precarious .
while , then , every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular interest in union , all the parts combined can not fail to find in the united mass of means and efforts greater strength , greater resource , proportionably greater security from external danger , a less frequent interruption of their peace by foreign nations , and what is of inestimable value , they must derive from union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves which so frequently afflict neighboring countries not tied together by the same governments , which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce , but which opposite foreign alliances , attachments , and intrigues would stimulate and imbitter .
hence , likewise , they will avoid the necessity of those overgrown military establishments which , under any form of government , are inauspicious to liberty , and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile to republican liberty .
in this sense it is that your union ought to be considered as a main prop of your liberty , and that the love of the one ought to endear to you the preservation of the other .
these considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and virtuous mind , and exhibit the continuance of the union as a primary object of patriotic desire .
is there a doubt whether a common government can embrace so large a sphere ?
let experience solve it .
to listen to mere speculation in such a case were criminal .
we are authorized to hope that a proper organization of the whole , with the auxiliary agency of governments for the respective subdivisions , will afford a happy issue to the experiment .
it is well worth a fair and full experiment .
with such powerful and obvious motives to union affecting all parts of our country , while experience shall not have demonstrated its impracticability , there will always be reason to distrust the patriotism of those who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands .
in contemplating the causes which may disturb our union it occurs as matter of serious concern that any ground should have been furnished for characterizing parties by geographical discriminations -- northern and southern , atlantic and western-- whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief that there is a real difference of local interests and views .
one of the expedients of party to acquire influence within particular districts is to misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts .
you can not shield yourselves too much against the jealousies and heartburnings which spring from these misrepresentations ; they tend to render alien to each other those who ought to be bound together by fraternal affection .
the inhabitants of our western country have lately had a useful lesson on this head .
they have seen in the negotiation by the executive and in the unanimous ratification by the senate of the treaty with spain , and in the universal satisfaction at that event throughout the united states , a decisive proof how unfounded were the suspicions propagated among them of a policy in the general government and in the atlantic states unfriendly to their interests in regard to the mississippi .
they have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties that with great britain and that with spain -- which secure to them everything they could desire in respect to our foreign relations toward confirming their prosperity .
will it not be their wisdom to rely for the preservation of these advantages on the union by which they were procured ?
will they not henceforth be deaf to those advisers , if such there are , who would sever them from their brethren and connect them with aliens ?
to the efficacy and permanency of your union a government for the whole is indispensable .
no alliances , however strict , between the parts can be an adequate substitute .
they must inevitably experience the infractions and interruptions which all alliances in all times have experienced .
sensible of this momentous truth , you have improved upon your first essay by the adoption of a constitution of government better calculated than your former for an intimate union and for the efficacious management of your common concerns .
this government , the offspring of our own choice , uninfluenced and unawed , adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation , completely free in its principles , in the distribution of its powers , uniting security with energy , and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment , has a just claim to your confidence and your support .
respect for its authority , compliance with its laws , acquiescence in its measures , are duties enjoined by the fundamental maxims of true liberty .
the basis of our political systems is the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government .
but the constitution which at any time exists till changed by an explicit and authentic act of the whole people is sacredly obligatory upon all .
the very idea of the power and the right of the people to establish government presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the established government .
all obstructions to the execution of the laws , all combinations and associations , under whatever plausible character , with the real design to direct , control , counteract , or awe the regular deliberation and action of the constituted authorities , are destructive of this fundamental principle and of fatal tendency .
they serve to organize faction ; to give it an artificial and extraordinary force ; to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation the will of a party , often a small but artful and enterprising minority of the community , and , according to the alternate triumphs of different parties , to snake the public administration the mirror of the ill - concerted and incongruous projects of faction rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans , digested by common counsels and modified by mutual interests .
however combinations or associations of the above description may now and then answer popular ends , they are likely in the course of time and things to become potent engines by which cunning , ambitious , and unprincipled men will be enabled to subvert the power of the people , and to usurp for themselves the reins of government , destroying .
afterwards the very engines which have lifted them to unjust dominion .
toward the preservation of your government and the permanency of your present happy state , it is requisite not only that you steadily discountenance irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority , but also that you resist with care the spirit of innovation upon its principles , however specious the pretexts .
one method of assault may be to effect in the forms of the constitution alterations which will impair the energy of the system , and thus to undermine what can not be directly overthrown .
in all the changes to which you may be invited remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to fix the true character of governments as of other human institutions ; that experience is the surest standard by which to test the real tendency of the existing constitution of a country ; that facility in changes upon the credit of mere hypothesis and opinion exposes to perpetual change , from the endless variety of hypothesis and opinion ; and remember especially that for the efficient management of your common interests in a country so extensive as ours a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security of liberty is indispensable .
liberty itself will find in such a government , with powers properly distributed and adjusted , its surest guardian .
it is , indeed , little else than a name where the government is too feeble to withstand the enterprises of faction , to confine each member of the society within the limits prescribed by the laws , and to maintain all in the secure and tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property .
i have already intimated to you the danger of parties in the state , with particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations .
let me now take a more comprehensive view , and warn you in the most solemn manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party generally .
this spirit , unfortunately , is inseparable from our nature , having its root in the strongest passions of the human mind .
it exists under different shapes in all governments , more or less stifled , controlled , or repressed ; but in those of the popular form it is seen in its greatest rankness and is truly their worst enemy .
the alternate domination of one faction over another , sharpened by the spirit of revenge natural to party dissension , which in different ages and countries has perpetrated the most horrid enormities , is itself a frightful despotism .
but this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism .
the disorders and miseries which result gradually incline the minds of men to seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual , and sooner or later the chief of some prevailing faction , more able or more fortunate than his competitors , turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation on the ruins of public liberty .
without looking forward to an extremity of this kind ( which nevertheless ought not to be entirely out of sight ) , the common and continual mischiefs of the spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise people to discourage and restrain it .
it serves always to distract the public councils and enfeeble the public administration .
it agitates the community with ill - rounded jealousies and false alarms ; kindles the animosity of one part against another ; foments occasionally riot and insurrection .
it opens the door to foreign influence and corruption , which find a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels of party passion .
thus the policy and the will of one country are subjected to the policy and will of another .
there is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the administration of the government , and serve to keep alive the spirit of liberty .
this within certain limits is probably true ; and in governments of a monarchical cast patriotism may look with indulgence , if not with favor , upon the spirit of party .
but in those of the popular character , in governments purely elective , it is a spirit not to be encouraged .
from their natural tendency it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every salutary purpose ; and there being constant danger of excess , the effort ought to be by force of public opinion to mitigate and assuage it .
a fire not to be quenched , it demands a uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame , lest , instead of warming , it should consume .
it is important , likewise , that the habits of thinking in a free country should inspire caution in those intrusted with its administration to confine themselves within their respective constitutional spheres , avoiding in the exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another .
the spirit of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one , and thus to create , whatever the form of government , a real despotism .
a just estimate of that love of power and proneness to abuse it which predominates in the human heart is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of this position .
the necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of political power , by dividing and distributing it into different depositories , and constituting each the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the others , has been evinced by experiments ancient and modern , some of them in our country and under our own eyes .
to preserve them must be as necessary as to institute them .
if in the opinion of the people the distribution or modification of the constitutional powers be in any particular wrong , let it be corrected by an amendment in the way which the constitution designates .
but let there be no change by usurpation ; for though this in one instance may be the instrument of good , it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed .
the precedent must always greatly overbalance in permanent evil any partial or transient benefit which the use can at any time yield .
of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity , religion and morality are indispensable supports .
in vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism who should labor to subvert these great pillars of human happiness -- these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens .
the mere politician , equally with the pious man , ought to respect and to cherish them .
a volume could not trace all their connections with private and public felicity .
let it simply be asked , where is the security for property , for reputation , for life , if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice ?
and let us with caution indulge the supposition that morality can be maintained without religion .
whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure , reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle .
it is substantially true that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of popular government .
the rule indeed extends with more or less force to every species of free government .
who that is a sincere friend to it can look with indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric ?
promote , then , as an object of primary importance , institutions ' for the general diffusion of knowledge .
in proportion as the structure of a government gives force to public opinion , it is essential that public opinion should be enlightened .
as a very important source of strength and security , cherish public credit .
one method of preserving it is to use it as sparingly as possible , avoiding occasions of expense by cultivating peace , but remembering also that timely disbursements to prepare for danger frequently prevent much greater disbursements to repel it ; avoiding likewise the accumulation of debt , not only by shunning occasions of expense , but by vigorous exertions in time of peace to discharge the debts which unavoidable wars have occasioned , not ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burthen which we ourselves ought to bear .
the execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives ; but it is necessary that public opinion should cooperate .
to facilitate to them the performance of their duty it is essential that you should practically bear in mind that toward the payment of debts there must be revenue ; that to have revenue there must be taxes ; that no taxes can be devised which are not more or less inconvenient and unpleasant ; that thee intrinsic embarrassment inseparable from the selection of the proper objects ( which is always a choice of difficulties ) , ought to be a decisive motive for a candid construction of the conduct of the government in making it , and for a spirit of acquiescence in the measures for obtaining revenue which the public exigencies may at any time dictate .
observe good faith and justice toward all nations .
cultivate peace and harmony with all .
religion and morality enjoin this conduct .
and can it be that good policy does not equally enjoin it ?
it will be worthy of a free , enlightened , and at no distant period a great nation to give to mankind the magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted justice and benevolence .
who can doubt that in the course of time and things the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which might be lost by a steady adherence to it ?
can it be that providence has not connected the permanent felicity of a nation with its virtue ?
the experiment , at least , is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature .
alas !
is it rendered impossible by its vices ?
in the execution of such a plan nothing is more essential than that permanent , inveterate antipathies against particular nations and passionate attachments for others should be excluded , and that in place of them just and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated .
the nation which indulges toward another an habitual hatred or an habitual fondness is in some degree a slave .
it is a slave to its animosity or to its affection , either of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest .
antipathy in one nation against another disposes each more readily to offer insult and injury , to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage , and to be haughty and intractable when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur .
hence frequent collisions , obstinate , envenomed , and bloody contests .
the nation prompted by ill will and resentment sometimes impels to war the government contrary to the best calculations of policy .
the government sometimes participates in the national propensity , and adopts through passion what reason would reject .
at other times it makes the animosity of the nation subservient to projects of hostility , instigated by pride , ambition , and other sinister and pernicious motives .
the peace often , sometimes perhaps the liberty , of nations has been the victim .
so , likewise , a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a variety of evils .
sympathy for the favorite nation , facilitating the illusion of an imaginary common interest in cases where no real common interest exists , and infusing into one the enmities of the other , betrays the former into a participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter without adequate inducement or justification .
it leads also to concessions to the favorite nation of privileges denied to others , which is apt doubly to injure the nation making the concessions by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have been retained , and by exciting jealousy , ill will , and a disposition to retaliate in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld ; and it gives to ambitions , corrupted , or deluded citizens ( who devote themselves to the favorite nation ) facility to betray or sacrifice the interests of their own country without odium , sometimes even with popularity , gilding with the appearances of a virtuous sense of obligation , a commendable deference for public opinion , or a laudable zeal for public good the base or foolish compliances of ambition , corruption , or infatuation .
as avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways , such attachments are particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot .
how many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions , to practice the arts of seduction , to mislead public opinion , to influence or awe the public councils !
such an attachment of a small or weak toward a great and powerful nation dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter .
against the insidious wiles of foreign influence ( i conjure you to believe me , fellow - citizens ) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake , since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most baneful foes of republican government .
but that jealousy , to be useful , must be impartial , else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided , instead of a defense against it .
excessive partiality for one foreign nation and excessive dislike of another cause those whom they actuate to see danger only on one side , and serve to veil and even second the arts of influence on the other .
real patriots who may resist the intrigues of the favorite are liable to become suspected and odious , while its tools and dupes usurp the applause and confidence of the people to surrender their interests .
the great rule of conduct for us in regard to foreign nations is , in extending our commercial relations to have with them as little political connection as possible .
so far as we have already formed engagements let them be fulfilled with perfect good faith .
here let us stop .
europe has a set of primary interests which to us have none or a very remote relation .
hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies , the causes of which are essentially foreign to our concerns .
hence , therefore , it must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves by artificial ties in the ordinary vicissitudes of her politics or the ordinary combinations and collisions of her friendships or enmities .
our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a different course .
if we remain one people , under an efficient government , the period is not far off when we may defy material injury from external annoyance ; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality we may at any time resolve upon to be scrupulously respected ; when belligerent nations , under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us , will not lightly hazard the giving us provocation ; when we may choose peace or war , as our interest , guided by justice , shall counsel .
why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation ?
why quit our own to stand upon foreign ground ?
why , by interweaving our destiny with that of any part of europe , entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of european ambition , rivalship , interest , humor , or caprice ?
it is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world , so far , i mean , as we are now at liberty to do it ; for let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing engagements .
i hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private affairs that honesty is always .
the best policy .
i repeat , therefore , let those engagements be unwise to extend them .
taking care always to keep ourselves by suitable establishments on a respectable defensive posture , we may safely trust to temporary alliances for extraordinary emergencies .
harmony , liberal intercourse with all nations are recommended by policy , humanity , and interest .
but even our commercial policy should hold an equal and impartial hand , neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences ; consulting the natural course of things ; diffusing and diversifying by gentle means the streams of commerce , but forcing nothing ; establishing with powers so disposed , in order to give trade a stable course , to define the rights of our merchants , and to enable the government to support them , conventional rules of intercourse , the best that present circumstances and mutual opinion will permit , but temporary and liable to be from time to time abandoned or varied as experience and circumstances shall dictate ; constantly keeping in view that it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested favors from another ; that it must pay with a portion of its independence for whatever it may accept under that character ; that by such acceptance it may place itself in the condition of having given equivalents for nominal favors , and yet of being reproached with ingratitude for not giving more .
there can be no greater error than to expect or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation .
it is an illusion which experience must cure , which a just pride ought to discard .
in offering to you , my countrymen , these counsels of an old and affectionate friend i dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression i could wish -- that they will control the usual current of the passions or prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the destiny of nations .
but if i may even flatter myself that they may be productive of some partial benefit , some occasional good -- that they may now and then recur to moderate the fury of party spirit , to warn against the mischiefs of foreign intrigue , to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism-- this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare by which they have been dictated .
how far in the discharge of my official duties i have been guided by the principles which have been delineated the public records and other evidences of my conduct must witness to you and to the world .
to myself , the assurance of my own conscience is that i have at least believed myself to be guided by them .
in relation to the still subsisting war in europe my proclamation of the 22d of april , 1793 , is the index to my plan .
sanctioned by your approving voice and by that of your representatives in both houses of congress , the spirit of that measure has continually governed me , uninfluenced by any attempts to deter or divert me from it .
after deliberate examination , with the aid of the best lights i could obtain , i was well satisfied that our country , under all the circumstances of the case , had a right to take , and was bound in duty and interest to take , a neutral position .
having taken it , i determined as far as should depend upon me to maintain it with moderation , perseverance , and firmness .
the considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct it is not necessary on this occasion to detail .
i will only observe that , according to my understanding of the matter , that right , so far from being denied by any of the belligerent powers , has been virtually admitted by all .
the duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred , without anything more , from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation , in cases in which it is free to act , to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and amity toward other nations .
the inducements of interest for observing that conduct will best be referred to your own reflections and experience .
with me a predominant motive has been to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent institutions , and to progress without interruption to that degree of strength and consistency which is necessary to give it , humanly speaking , the command of its own fortunes .
though in reviewing the incidents of my administration i am unconscious of intentional error , i am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it probable that i may have committed many errors .
whatever they may be , i fervently beseech the almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may tend .
i shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to view them with indulgence , and that , after forty - five years of my life dedicated to its service with an upright zeal , the faults of incompetent abilities will be consigned to oblivion , as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest .
relying on its kindness in this as in other things , and actuated by that fervent love toward it which is so natural to a man who views in it the native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations , i anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat in which i promise myself to realize without alloy the sweet enjoyment of partaking in the midst of my fellow - citizens the benign influence of good laws under a free government -- the ever - favorite object of my heart , and the happy reward , as i trust , of our mutual cares , labors , and dangers .

fellow citizens of the senate and of the house of representatives : when we call to mind the gracious indulgence of heaven , by which the american people became a nation ; when we survey the general prosperity of our country , and look forward to the riches , power , and happiness , to which it seems destined ; with the deepest regret do i announce to you , that during your recess , some of the citizens of the united states have been found capable of an insurrection .
it is due , however , to the character of our government , and to its stability , which can not be shaken by the enemies of order , freely to unfold the course of this event .
during the session of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety , it was expedient to exercise the legislative power , granted by the constitution of the united states , " to lay and collect excises . "
in a majority of the states , scarcely an objection was heard to this mode of taxation .
in some , indeed , alarms were at first conceived , until they were banished by reason and patriotism .
in the four western counties of pennsylvania , a prejudice , fostered and embittered by the artifice of men , who labored for an ascendency over the will of others , by the guidance of their passions , produced symptoms of riot and violence .
it is well known , that congress did not hesitate to examine the complaints which were presented , and to relieve them , as far as justice dictated , or general convenience would permit , but the impression , which this moderation made on the discontented , did not correspond , with what it deserved .
the arts of delusion were no longer confined to the efforts of designing individuals .
the very forbearance to press prosecutions was misinterpreted into a fear of urging the execution of the laws ; and associations of men began to denounce threats against the officers employed .
from a belief , that by a more formal concert , their operation might be defeated , certain self - created societies 36 assumed the tone of condemnation .
hence , while the greater part of pennsylvania itself were conforming themselves to the acts of excise , a few counties were resolved to frustrate them .
it was now perceived , that every expectation from the tenderness which had been hitherto pursued , was unavailing , and that further delay could only create an opinion of impotency or irresolution in the government .
legal process was , therefore , delivered to the marshal , against the rioters and delinquent distillers .
no sooner was he understood to be engaged in this duty , than the vengeance of armed men was aimed at his person , and the person and property of the inspector of the revenue .
they fired upon the marshal , arrested him , and detained him for some time , as a prisoner .
he was obliged , by the jeopardy of his life , to renounce the service of other process , on the west side of the allegeny mountain ; and a deputation was afterwards sent to him to demand a surrender of that which he had served .
a numerous body repeatedly attacked the house of the inspector , seized his papers of office , and finally destroyed by fire , his buildings , and whatsoever they contained .
both of these officers , from a just regard to their safety , fled to the seat of government ; it being avowed , that the motives to such outrages were to compel the resignation of the inspector , to withstand by force of arms the authority of the united states , and thereby to extort a repeal of the laws of excise , and an alteration in the conduct of government .
upon the testimony of these facts , an associate justice of the supreme court of the united states notified to me , that " in the counties of washington and allegeny , in pennsylvania , laws of the united states were opposed , and the execution thereof obstructed by combinations , too powerful to be suppressed by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings , or by the powers vested in the marshal of that district . "
on this call , momentous in the extreme , i sought and weighed , what might best subdue the crisis .
on the one hand , the judiciary was pronounced to be stripped of its capacity to enforce the laws ; crimes , which reached the very existence of social order , were perpetrated without controul , the friends of government were insulted , abused , and overawed into silence , or an apparent acquiescence ; and the yield to the treasonable fury of so small a portion of the united states , would be to violate the fundamental principle of our constitution , which enjoins that the will of the majority shall prevail .
on the other , to array citizen against citizen , to publish the dishonor of such excesses , to encounter the expense , and other embarrassments of so distant an expedition , were steps too delicate , too closely interwoven with many affecting considerations , to be lightly adopted .
i postponed , therefore , the summoning of the militia immediately into the field .
but i required them to be held in readiness , that if my anxious endeavours to reclaim the deluded , and to convince the malignant of their danger , should be fruitless , military force might be prepared to act , before the season should be too far advanced .
my proclamation of the 7th of august last was accordingly issued , and accompanied by the appointment of commissioners , who were charged to repair to the scene of insurrection .
they were authorized to confer with any bodies of men , or individuals .
they were instructed to be candid and explicit , in stating the sensations , which had been excited in the executive , and his earnest wish to avoid a resort to coercion .
to represent , however , that without submission , coercion must be the resort ; but to invite them , at the same time , to return to the demeanor of faithful citizens , by such accommodations as lay within the sphere of the executive power .
pardon , too , was tendered to them by the government of the united states , and that of pennsylvania , upon no other condition , than a satisfactory assurance of obedience to the laws .
although the report of the commissioners marks their firmness and abilities , and must unite all virtuous men , by shewing , that the means of conciliation have been exhausted , all of those who had committed or abetted the tumults , did not subscribe the mild form , which was proposed , as the atonement ; and the indications of a peaceable temper were neither sufficiently general , nor conclusive , to recommend or warrant , a further suspension of the march of the militia .
thus , the painful alternative could not be discarded .
i ordered the militia to march , after once more admonishing the insurgents , in my proclamation of the 25th of september last .
it was a task too difficult to ascertain with precision , the lowest degree of force , competent to the quelling of the insurrection .
from a respect , indeed , to oeconomy , and the ease of my fellow citizens belonging to the militia , it would have gratified me to accomplish such an estimate .
my very reluctance to ascribe too much importance to the opposition , had its extent been accurately seen , would have been a decided inducement to the smallest efficient numbers .
in this uncertainty , therefore , i put in motion fifteen thousand men , as being an army , which , according to all human calculation , would be prompt , and adequate in every view ; and might perhaps , by rendering resistance desperate , prevent the effusion of blood .
quotas had been assigned to the states of new - jersey , pennsylvania , maryland , and virginia ; the governor of pennsylvania having declared on this occasion , an opinion which justified a requisition to the other states .
as commander in chief of the militia , when called into the actual service of the united states , i have visited the places of general rendezvous , to obtain more exact information , and to direct a plan for ulterior movements .
had there been room for a persuasion , that the laws were secure from obstruction ; that the civil magistrate was able to bring to justice such of the most culpable , as have not embraced the proffered terms of amnesty , and may be deemed fit objects of example ; that the friends to peace and good government were not in need of that aid and countenance , which they ought always to receive , and i trust , ever will receive , against the vicious and turbulent ; i should have caught with avidity the opportunity of restoring the militia to their families and home .
but succeeding intelligence has tended to manifest the necessity of what has been done ; it being now confessed by those who were not inclined to exaggerate the ill - conduct of the insurgents , that their malevolence was not pointed merely to a particular law ; but that a spirit , inimical to all order , has actuated many of the offenders .
if the state of things had afforded reason for the continuance of my presence with the army , it would not have been withholden .
but every appearance assuring such an issue , as will redound to the reputation and strength of the united states , i have judged it most proper , to resume my duties at the seat of government , leaving the chief command with the governor of virginia .
still , however , as it is probable , that in a commotion like the present , whatsoever may be the pretence , the purposes of mischief and revenge may not be laid aside ; the stationing of a small force for a certain period in the four western counties of pennsylvania will be indispensable ; whether we contemplate the situation of those , who are connected with the execution of the laws ; or of others who may have exposed themselves by an honorable attachment to them .
thirty days from the commencement of this session , being the legal limitation of the employment of the militia , congress can not be too early occupied with this subject .
among the discussions , which may arise from this aspect of our affairs , and from the documents which will be submitted to congress , it will not escape their observation , that not only the inspector of the revenue , but other officers of the united states in pennsylvania have , from their fidelity in the discharge of their functions , sustained material injuries to their property .
the obligation and policy of indemnifying them are strong and obvious .
it may also merit attention , whether policy will not enlarge this provision to the retribution of other citizens , who , though not under the ties of office , may have suffered damage by their generous exertions for upholding the constitution and the laws .
the amount , even if all the injured were included , would not be great ; and on future emergencies , the government would be amply repaid by the influence of an example , that he , who incurs a loss in its defence shall find a recompense in its liberality .
while there is cause to lament , that occurrences of this nature should have disgraced the name , or interrupted the tranquillity of any part of our community , or should have diverted to a new application , any portion of the public resources , there are not wanting real and substantial consolations for the misfortune .
it has demonstrated , that our prosperity rests on solid foundations ; by furnishing an additional proof , that my fellow citizens understand the true principles of government and liberty : that they feel their inseparable union : that notwithstanding all the devices which have been used to sway them from their interest and duty , they are now as ready to maintain the authority of the laws against licentious invasions , as they were to defend their rights against usurpation .
it has been a spectacle , displaying to the highest advantage , the value of republican government , to behold the most and least wealthy of our citizens standing in the same ranks as private soldiers ; pre - eminently distinguished by being the army of the constitution ; undeterred by a march of three hundred miles over rugged mountains , by the approach of an inclement season , or by any other discouragement .
nor ought i to omit to acknowledge the efficacious and patriotic co - operation , which i have experienced from the chief magistrates of the states , to which my requisitions have been addressed .
to every description , indeed , of citizens let praise be given .
but let them persevere in their affectionate vigilance over that precious depository of american happiness , the constitution of the united states .
let them cherish it too , for the sake of those , who from every clime are daily seeking a dwelling in our land .
and when in the calm moments of reflection , they shall have retraced the origin and progress of the insurrection , let them determine , whether it has not been fomented by combinations of men , who , careless of consequences , and disregarding the unerring truth , that those who rouse , can not always appease a civil convulsion , have disseminated , from an ignorance or version of facts , suspicions , jealousies , and accusations of the whole government .
having thus fulfilled the engagement , which i took , when i entered into office , " to the best of my ability to preserve , protect , and defend the constitution of the united states , " on you , gentlemen , and the people by whom you are deputed , i rely for support .
in the arrangements , to which the possibility of a similar contingency will naturally draw your attention , it ought not to be forgotten , that the militia laws have exhibited such striking defects , as could not have been supplied but by the zeal of our citizens .
besides the extraordinary expense and waste , which are not the least of the defects , every appeal to those laws is attended with a doubt of its success .
the devising and establishing of a well regulated militia , would be a genuine source of legislative honor , and a perfect title to public gratitude .
i , therefore , entertain a hope , that the present session will not pass , without carrying to its full energy the power of organizing , arming , and disciplining the militia ; and thus providing , in the language of the constitution , for calling them forth to execute the laws of the union , suppress insurrections , and repel invasions .
as auxiliary to the state of our defence , to which congress can never too frequently recur , they will not omit to enquire whether the fortifications , which have been already licensed by law , be commensurate with our exigencies .
the intelligence from the army , under the command of general wayne , is a happy presage to our military operations against the hostile indians north of the ohio .
from the advices which have been forwarded , the advance which he has made must have damped the ardor of the savages , and weakened their obstinacy in waging war against the united states .
and yet , even at this late hour , when our power to punish them can not be questioned , we shall not be unwilling to cement a lasting peace , upon terms of candor , equity , and good neighborhood .
towards none of the indian tribes have overtures of friendship been spared .
the creeks in particular are covered from encroachment by the interposition of the general government and that of georgia .
from a desire also to remove the discontents of the six nations , a settlement , meditated at presqu'isle on lake erie , has been suspended ; and an agent is now endeavoring to rectify any misconception , into which they may have fallen .
but i can not refrain from again pressing upon your deliberations , the plan which i recommended at the last session , for the improvement of harmony with all the indians within our limits , by the fixing and conducting of trading houses , upon the principles then expressed .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : the time , which has elapsed , since the commencement of our fiscal measures , has developed our pecuniary resources , so as to open a way for a definitive plan for the redemption of the public debt .
it is believed , that the result is such , as to encourage congress to consummate this work , without delay .
nothing can more promote the permanent welfare of the nation , and nothing would be more grateful to our constituents .
indeed whatsoever is unfinished of our system of public credit , can not be benefited by procrastination ; and as far as may be practicable , we ought to place that credit on grounds which can not be disturbed , and to prevent that progressive accumulation of debt which must ultimately endanger all governments .
an estimate of the necessary appropriations , including the expenditures into which we have been driven by the insurrection , will be submitted to congress .
gentlemen of the senate , and of the house of representatives : the mint of the united states has entered upon the coinage of the precious metals ; and considerable sums of defective coins and bullion have been lodged with the director by individuals .
there is a pleasing prospect that the institution will , at no remote day , realize the expectation which was originally formed of its utility .
in subsequent communications , certain circumstances of our intercourse with foreign nations , will be transmitted to congress .
however , it may not be unseasonable to announce that my policy in our foreign transactions has been , to cultivate peace with all the world ; to observe treaties with pure and absolute faith ; to check every deviation from the line of impartiality ; to explain what may have been misapprehended , and correct what may have been injurious to any nation ; and having thus acquired the right , to lose no time in acquiring the ability , to insist upon justice being done to ourselves .
let us unite , therefore , in imploring the supreme ruler of nations , to spread his holy protection over these united states : to turn the machinations of the wicked to the confirming of our constitution : to enable us at all times to root out internal sedition , and put invasion to flight : to perpetuate to our country that prosperity , which his goodness has already conferred , and to verify the anticipations of this government being a safe guard to human rights .

whereas i have received authentic information , that certain lawless and wicked persons , of the western frontier in the state of georgia , did lately invade , burn , and destroy a town belonging to the cherokee nation , although in amity with the united states , and put to death several indians of that nation ; and whereas such outrageous conduct not only violates the rights of humanity , but also endangers the public peace , and it highly becomes the honor and good faith of the united states to pursue all legal means for the punishment of those atrocious offenders ; i have , therefore , thought fit to issue this my proclamation , hereby exhorting all the citizens of the united states , and requiring all the officers thereof , according to their respective stations , to use their utmost endeavours to bring those offenders to justice .
and i do moreover offer a reward of five hundred dollars for each and every of the above - named persons , who shall be so apprehended and brought to justice , and shall be proved to have assumed or exercised any command or authority among the perpetrators of the crimes aforesaid , at the time of committing the same .

fellow citizens of the senate and the house of representatives : 
 among the vicissitudes incident to life , no event could have filled me with greater anxieties than that of which the notification was transmitted by your order , and received on the fourteenth day of the present month .
on the one hand , i was summoned by my country , whose voice i can never hear but with veneration and love , from a retreat which i had chosen with the fondest predilection , and , in my flattering hopes , with an immutable decision , as the asylum of my declining years : a retreat which was rendered every day more necessary as well as more dear to me , by the addition of habit to inclination , and of frequent interruptions in my health to the gradual waste committed on it by time .
on the other hand , the magnitude and difficulty of the trust to which the voice of my country called me , being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and most experienced of her citizens , a distrustful scrutiny into his qualification , could not but overwhelm with dispondence , one , who , inheriting inferior endowments from nature and unpractised in the duties of civil administration , ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own deficencies .
in this conflict of emotions , all i dare aver , is , that it has been my faithful study to collect my duty from a just appreciation of every circumstance , by which it might be affected .
all i dare hope , is , that , if in executing this task i have been too much swayed by a grateful remembrance of former instances , or by an affectionate sensibility to this transcendent proof , of the confidence of my fellow - citizens ; and have thence too little consulted my incapacity as well as disinclination for the weighty and untried cares before me ; my error will be palliated by the motives which misled me , and its consequences be judged by my country , with some share of the partiality in which they originated .
such being the impressions under which i have , in obedience to the public summons , repaired to the present station ; it would be peculiarly improper to omit in this first official act , my fervent supplications to that almighty being who rules over the universe , who presides in the councils of nations , and whose providential aids can supply every human defect , that his benediction may consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the people of the united states , a government instituted by themselves for these essential purposes : and may enable every instrument employed in its administration to execute with success , the functions allotted to his charge .
in tendering this homage to the great author of every public and private good , i assure myself that it expresses your sentiments not less than my own ; nor those of my fellow - citizens at large , less than either .
no people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand , which conducts the affairs of men more than the people of the united states .
every step , by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation , seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency .
and in the important revolution just accomplished in the system of their united government , the tranquil deliberations and voluntary consent of so many distinct communities , from which the event has resulted , can not be compared with the means by which most governments have been established , without some return of pious gratitude along with an humble anticipation of the future blessings which the past seem to presage .
these reflections , arising out of the present crisis , have forced themselves too strongly on my mind to be suppressed .
you will join with me i trust in thinking , that there are none under the influence of which , the proceedings of a new and free government can more auspiciously commence .
by the article establishing the executive department , it is made the duty of the president " to recommend to your consideration , such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient . "
the circumstances under which i now meet you , will acquit me from entering into that subject , farther than to refer to the great constitutional charter under which you are assembled ; and which , in defining your powers , designates the objects to which your attention is to be given .
it will be more consistent with those circumstances , and far more congenial with the feelings which actuate me , to substitute , in place of a recommendation of particular measures , the tribute that is due to the talents , the rectitude , and the patriotism which adorn the characters selected to devise and adopt them .
in these honorable qualifications , i behold the surest pledges , that as on one side , no local prejudices , or attachments ; no seperate views , nor party animosities , will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye which ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests : so , on another , that the foundations of our national policy will be laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality ; and the pre - eminence of a free government , be exemplified by all the attributes which can win the affections of its citizens , and command the respect of the world .
i dwell on this prospect with every satisfaction which an ardent love for my country can inspire : since there is no truth more thoroughly established , than that there exists in the oeconomy and course of nature , an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness , between duty and advantage , between the genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy , and the solid rewards of public prosperity and felicity : since we ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of heaven , can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right , which heaven itself has ordained : and since the preservation of the sacred fire of liberty , and the destiny of the republican model of government , are justly considered as deeply , perhaps as finally staked , on the experiment entrusted to the hands of the american people .
besides the ordinary objects submitted to your care , it will remain with your judgment to decide , how far an exercise of the occasional power delegated by the fifth article of the constitution is rendered expedient at the present juncture by the nature of objections which have been urged against the system , or by the degree of inquietude which has given birth to them .
instead of undertaking particular recommendations on this subject , in which i could be guided by no lights derived from official opportunities , i shall again give way to my entire confidence in your discernment and pursuit of the public good : for i assure myself that whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which might endanger the benefits of an united and effective government , or which ought to await the future lessons of experience ; a reverence for the characteristic rights of freemen , and a regard for the public harmony , will sufficiently influence your deliberations on the question how far the former can be more impregnably fortified , or the latter be safely and advantageously promoted .
to the preceeding observations i have one to add , which will be most properly addressed to the house of representatives .
it concerns myself , and will therefore be as brief as possible .
when i was first honoured with a call into the service of my country , then on the eve of an arduous struggle for its liberties , the light in which i contemplated my duty required that i should renounce every pecuniary compensation .
from this resolution i have in no instance departed .
and being still under the impressions which produced it , i must decline as inapplicable to myself , any share in the personal emoluments , which may be indispensably included in a permanent provision for the executive department ; and must accordingly pray that the pecuniary estimates for the station in which i am placed , may , during my continuance in it , be limited to such actual expenditures as the public good may be thought to require .
having thus imparted to you my sentiments , as they have been awakened by the occasion which brings us together , i shall take my present leave ; but not without resorting once more to the benign parent of the human race , in humble supplication that since he has been pleased to favour the american people , with opportunities for deliberating in perfect tranquility , and dispositions for deciding with unparellelled unanimity on a form of government , for the security of their union , and the advancement of their happiness ; so his divine blessing may be equally conspicuous in the enlarged views , the temperate consultations , and the wise measures on which the success of this government must depend .

fellow citizens of the senate and house of representatives : i embrace with great satisfaction the opportunity which now presents itself , of congratulating you on the present favourable prospects of our public affairs .
the recent accession of the important state of north carolina to the constitution of the united states ( of which official information has been received ) ; the rising credit and respectability of our country ; the general and increasing good will towards the government of the union , and the concord , peace , and plenty , with which we are blessed are circumstances auspicious in an eminent degree , to our national prosperity .
in resuming your consultations for the general good , you can not but derive encouragement from the reflection that the measures of the last session have been as satisfactory to your constituents , as the novelty and difficulty of the work allowed you to hope .
still further to realize their expectations and to secure the blessings which a gracious providence has placed within our reach , will in the course of the present important session , call for the cool and deliberate exertion of your patriotism , firmness and wisdom .
among the many interesting objects , which will engage your attention , that of providing for the common defence will merit particular regard .
to be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of perserving peace .
a free people ought not only to be armed but disciplined ; to which end a uniform and well digested plan is requisite : and their safety and interest require , that they should promote such manufactories , as tend to render them independent on others for essential , particularly for military supplies .
the proper establishment of the troops , which may be deemed indispensable , will be entitled to mature deliberation .
in the arrangements , which may be made respecting it , it will be of importance to conciliate the comfortable support of the officers and soldiers with a due regard to oeconomy .
there was reason to hope that the pacific measures adopted with regard to certain hostile tribes of indians would have relieved the inhabitants of our southern and western frontiers from their depredations .
but you will perceive from the information contained in the papers which i shall direct to be laid before you ( comprehending a communication from the commonwealth of virginia ) that we ought to be prepared to afford protection to those parts of the union ; and if necessary to punish aggressors .
the interests of the united states requires that our intercourse with other nations should be facilitated , by such provisions as will enable me to fulfill my duty in that respect , in the manner which circumstances may render most conducive to the public good : and to this end that the compensations to be made to the persons who may be employed , should according to the nature of their appointments , be defined by law ; and a competent fund designated for defraying the expenses incident to the conduct of our foreign affairs .
various considerations also render it expedient , that the terms on which foreigners may be admitted to the rights of citizens should be speedily ascertained by a uniform rule of naturalization .
uniformity in the currency , weights and measures of the united states is an object of great importance , and will i am persuaded be duly attended to .
the advancement of agriculture , commerce and manufactures by all proper means , will not i trust need recommendation .
but i can not forbear intimating to you the expediency of giving effectual encouragement as well to the introduction of new and useful inventions from abroad , as to the exertions of skill and genius in producing them at home ; and of facilitating the intercourse between the distant parts of our country by a due attention to the post - office and post - roads .
nor am i less persuaded , that you will agree with me in opinion , that there is nothing which can better deserve your patronage than the promotion of science and literature .
knowledge is in every country the surest basis of public happiness .
in one in which the measures of government receive their impression so immediately from the sense of the community as in ours it is proportionably essential .
to the security of a free constitution it contributes in various ways : by convincing those who are intrusted with the public administration , that every valuable end of government is best answered by the enlightened confidence of the people : and by teaching the people themselves to know and to value their own rights ; to discern and provide against invasions of them ; to distinguish between oppression and the necessary exercise of lawful authority ; between burthens proceeding from a disregard to their convenience and those resulting from the inevitable exigencies of society ; to discriminate the spirit of liberty from that of licentiousness , cherishing the first , avoiding the last , and uniting a speedy , but temperate vigilance against encroachments , with an inviolable respect to the laws .
whether this desirable object will be the best promoted by affording aids to seminaries of learning already established , by the institution of a national university , or by any other expedients , will be well worthy of a place in the deliberations of the legislature .

fellow citizens of the senate and of the house of representatives .
since the commencement of the term for which i have been again called into office no fit occasion has arisen for expressing to me fellow citizens at large the deep and respectful sense which i feel of the renewed testimony of public approbation .
while on the one hand it awakened my gratitude for all those instances of affectionate partiality with which i have been honored by my country , on the other it could not prevent an earnest wish for that retirement from which no private consideration should ever have torn me .
but influenced by the belief that my conduct would be estimated according to its real motives , and that the people , and the authorities derived from them , would support exertions having nothing personal for their object , i have obeyed the suffrage which commanded me to resume the executive power ; and i humbly implore that being on whose will the fate of nations depends to crown with success our mutual endeavors for the general happiness .
as soon as the war in europe had embraced those powers with whom the united states have the most extensive relations there was reason to apprehend that our intercourse with them might be interrupted and our disposition for peace drawn into question by the suspicions too often entertained by belligerent nations .
it seemed , therefore , to be my duty to admonish our citizens of the consequences of a contraband trade and of hostile acts to any of the parties , and to obtain by a declaration of the existing legal state of things an easier admission of our right to the immunities belonging to our situation .
under these impressions the proclamation which will be laid before you was issued .
in this posture of affairs , both new and delicate , i resolved to adopt general rules which should conform to the treaties and assert the privileges of the united states .
these were reduced into a system , which will be communicated to you .
although i have not thought of myself at liberty to forbid the sale of the prizes permitted by our treaty of commerce with france to be brought into our ports , i have not refused to cause them to be restored when they were taken within the protection of our territory , or by vessels commissioned or equipped in a warlike form within the limits of the united states .
it rests with the wisdom of congress to correct , improve , or enforce this plan of procedure ; and it will probably be found expedient to extend the legal code and the jurisdiction of the courts of the united states to many cases which , though dependent on principles already recognized , demand some further provisions .
where individuals shall , within the united states , array themselves in hostility against any of the powers at war , or enter upon military expeditions or enterprises within the jurisdiction of the united states , or usurp and exercise judicial authority within the united states , or where the penalties on violations of the law of nations may have been indistinctly marked , or are inadequate - these offenses can not receive too early and close an attention , and require prompt and decisive remedies .
whatsoever those remedies may be , they will be well administered by the judiciary , who possess a long - established course of investigation , effectual process , and officers in the habit of executing it .
in like manner , as several of the courts have doubted , under particular circumstances , their power to liberate the vessels of a nation at peace , and even of a citizen of the united states , although seized under a false color of being hostile property , and have denied their power to liberate certain captures within the protection of our territory , it would seem proper to regulate their jurisdiction in these points .
but if the executive is to be the resort in either of the two last - mentioned cases , it is hoped that he will be authorized by law to have facts ascertained by the courts when for his own information he shall request it .
i can not recommend to your notice measures for the fulfillment of our duties to the rest of the world without again pressing upon you the necessity of placing ourselves in a condition of complete defense and of exacting from them the fulfillment of their duties toward us .
the united states ought not to indulge a persuasion that , contrary to the order of human events , they will forever keep at a distance those painful appeals to arms with which the history of every other nation abounds .
there is a rank due to the united states among nations which will be withheld , if not absolutely lost , by the reputation of weakness .
if we desire to avoid insult , we must be able to repel it ; if we desire to secure peace , one of the most powerful instruments of our rising prosperity , it must be known that we are at all times ready for war .
the documents which will be presented to you will shew the amount and kinds of arms and military stores now in our magazines and arsenals ; and yet an addition even to these supplies can not with prudence be neglected , as it would leave nothing to the uncertainty of procuring warlike apparatus in the moment of public danger .
nor can such arrangements , with such objects , be exposed to the censure or jealousy of the warmest friends of republican government .
they are incapable of abuse in the hands of the militia , who ought to possess a pride in being the depository of the force of the republic , and may be trained to a degree of energy equal to every military exigency of the united states .
but it is an inquiry which can not be too solemnly pursued , whether the act " more effectually to provide for the national defense by establishing an uniform militia throughout the united states " has organized them so as to produce their full effect ; whether your own experience in the several states has not detected some imperfections in the scheme , and whether a material feature in an improvement of it ought not to be to afford an opportunity for the study of those branches of the military art which can scarcely ever be attained by practice alone .
the connection of the united states with europe has become extremely interesting .
the occurrences which relate to it and have passed under the knowledge of the executive will be exhibited to congress in a subsequent communication .
when we contemplate the war on our frontiers , it may be truly affirmed that every reasonable effort has been made to adjust the causes of dissension with the indians north of the ohio .
the instructions given to the commissioners evince a moderation and equity proceeding from a sincere love of peace , and a liberality having no restriction but the essential interests and dignity of the united states .
the attempt , however , of an amicable negotiation having been frustrated , the troops have marched to act offensively .
although the proposed treaty did not arrest the progress of military preparation , it is doubtful how far the advance of the season , before good faith justified active movements , may retard them during the remainder of the year .
from the papers and intelligence which relate to this important subject you will determine whether the deficiency in the number of troops granted by law shall be compensated by succors of militia , or additional encouragements shall be proposed to recruits .
an anxiety has been also demonstrated by the executive for peace with the creeks and the cherokees .
the former have been relieved with corn and with clothing , and offensive measures against them prohibited during the recess of congress .
to satisfy the complaints of the latter , prosecutions have been instituted for the violences committed upon them .
but the papers which will be delivered to you disclose the critical footing on which we stand in regard to both those tribes , and it is with congress to pronounce what shall be done .
after they shall have provided for the present emergency , it will merit their most serious labors to render tranquillity with the savages permanent by creating ties of interest .
next to a rigorous execution of justice on the violators of peace , the establishment of commerce with the indian nations in behalf of the united states is most likely to conciliate their attachment .
but it ought to be conducted without fraud , without extortion , with constant and plentiful supplies , with a ready market for the commodities of the indians and a stated price for what they give in payment and receive in exchange .
individuals will not pursue such a traffic unless they be allured by the hope of profit ; but it will be enough for the united states to be reimbursed only .
should this recommendation accord with the opinion of congress , they will recollect that it can not be accomplished by any means yet in the hands of the executive .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : 

 the commissioners charged with the settlement of accounts between the united states and individual states concluded their important function within the time limited by law , and the balances struck in their report , which will be laid before congress , have been placed on the books of the treasury .
on the first day of june last an installment of 1,000,000 florins became payable on the loans of the united states in holland .
this was adjusted by a prolongation of the period of reimbursement in nature of a new loan at an interest of 5 % for the term of ten years , and the expenses of this operation were a commission of 3 % .
the first installment of the loan of $ 2,000,000 from the bank of the united states has been paid , as was directed by law .
for the second it is necessary that provision be made .
no pecuniary consideration is more urgent than the regular redemption and discharge of the public debt .
on none can delay be more injurious or an economy of time more valuable .
the productiveness of the public revenues hitherto has continued to equal the anticipations which were formed of it , but it is not expected to prove commensurate with all the objects which have been suggested .
some auxiliary provisions will therefore , it is presumed , be requisite , and it is hoped that these may be made consistently with a due regard to the convenience of our citizens , who can not but be sensible of the true wisdom of encountering a small present addition to their contributions to obviate a future accumulation of burthens .
but here i can not forbear to recommend a repeal of the tax on the transportation of public prints .
there is no resource so firm for the government of the united states as the affections of the people , guided by an enlightened policy ; and to this primary good nothing can conduce more than a faithful representation of public proceedings , diffused without restraint throughout the united states .
an estimate of the appropriations necessary for the current service of the ensuing year and a statement of a purchase of arms and military stores made during the recess will be presented to congress .
gentlemen of the senate and of the house of representatives : 

 the several subjects to which i have now referred open a wide range to your deliberations and involve some of the choicest interests of our common country .
permit me to bring to your remembrance the magnitude of your task .
without an unprejudiced coolness the welfare of the government may be hazarded ; without harmony as far as consists with freedom of sentiment its dignity may be lost .
but as the legislative proceedings of the united states will never , i trust , be reproached for the want of temper or of candor , so shall not the public happiness languish from the want of my strenuous and warmest cooperation .

whereas , from a hope that the combinations against the constitution and laws of the united states , in certain of the western counties of pennsylvania , would yield to time and reflection , i thought it sufficient , in the first instance , rather to take measures for calling forth the militia than immediately to embody them ; but the moment is now come , when the overtures of forgiveness , with no other condition than a submission to law , have been only partially accepted ; when every form of conciliation not inconsistent with the being of government has been adopted , without effect ; when the well - disposed in those counties are unable by their influence and example to reclaim the wicked from their fury , and are compelled to associate in their own defence ; when the proffered lenity has been perversely misinterpreted into an apprehension that the citizens will march with reluctance ; when the opportunity of examining the serious consequences of a treasonable opposition has been employed in propagating principles of anarchy , endeavoring through emissaries to alienate the friends of order from its support , and inviting enemies to perpetrate similar acts of insurrection ; when it is manifest , that violence would continue to be exercised upon every attempt to enforce the laws ; when , therefore , government is set at defiance , the contest being whether a small proportion of the united states shall dictate to the whole union , and , at the expense of those who desire peace , indulge a desperate ambition ; 
 now , therefore , i , george washington , president of the united states , in obedience to that high and irresistible duty , consigned to me by the constitution , " to take care that the laws be faithfully executed ; " deploring that the american name should be sullied by the outrages of citizens on their : own government ; commiserating such as remain obstinate from delusion ; but resolved , in perfect reliance on that gracious providence which so signally displays its goodness towards this country , to reduce the refractory to a due subordination to the laws ; do hereby declare and make known , that , with a satisfaction which can be equalled only by the merits of the militia summoned into service from the states of new jersey , pennsylvania , maryland , and virginia , i have received intelligence of their patriotic alacrity , in obeying the call of the present , though painful , yet commanding necessity ; that a force , which , according to every reasonable expectation , is adequate to the exigency , is already in motion to the scene of disaffection ; that those who have confided or shall confide in the protection of government , shall meet full succor under the standard and from the arms of the united states ; that those who having offended against the laws have since entitled themselves to indemnity , will be treated with the most liberal good faith , if they shall not have forfeited their claim by any subsequent conduct , and that instructions are given accordingly .
and i do , moreover , exhort all individuals , officers , and bodies of men , to contemplate with abhorrence the measures leading directly or indirectly to those crimes , which produce this resort to military coercion ; to check , in their respective spheres , the efforts of misguided or designing men to substitute their misrepresentation in the place of truth , and their discontents in the place of stable government ; and to call to mind , that as the people of the united states have been permitted , under the divine favor , in perfect freedom , after solemn deliberation , in an enlightened age , to elect their own government , so will their gratitude for this inestimable blessing be best distinguished by firm exertions to maintain the constitution and the laws .
and , lastly , i again warn all persons , whomsoever and whersoever , not to abet , aid , or comfort the insurgents aforesaid , as they will answer the contrary at their peril ; and i do also require all officers and other citizens , according to their several duties , as far as may be in their power , to bring under the cognizance of the law all offenders in the premises .

whereas it appears that a state of war exists between austria , prussia , sardinia , great britain , and the united netherlands , on the one part , and france on the other ; and the duty and interest of the united states require , that they should with sincerity and good faith adopt and pursue a conduct friendly and impartial towards the belligerent powers : 
 i have therefore thought fit by these presents , to declare the disposition of the united states to observe the conduct aforesaid towards those powers respectively ; and to exhort and warn the citizens of the united states carefully to avoid all acts and proceedings whatsoever , which may in any manner tend to contravene such disposition .
and i do hereby also make known , that whosoever of the citizens of the united states shall render himself liable to punishment or forfeiture under the law of nations , by committing , aiding or abetting hostilities against any of the said powers , or by carrying to any of them , those articles which are deemed contraband by the modern usage of nations , will not receive the protection of the united states against such punishment or forfeiture ; and further that i have given instructions to those officers to whom it belongs , to cause prosecutions to be instituted against all persons , who shall , within the cognizance of the courts of the united states , violate the law of nations , with respect to the powers at war , or any of them .

beloved cherokees , 
 many years have passed since the white people first came to america .
in that long space of time many good men have considered how the condition of the indian natives of the country might be improved ; and many attempts have been made to effect it .
but , as we see at this day , all these attempts have been nearly fruitless .
i also have thought much on this subject , and anxiously wished that the various indian tribes , as well as their neighbours , the white people , might enjoy in abundance all the good things which make life comfortable and happy .
i have considered how this could be done ; and have discovered but one path that could lead them to that desirable situation .
in this path i wish all the indian nations to walk .
from the information received concerning you , my beloved cherokees , i am inclined to hope that you are prepared to take this path and disposed to pursue it .
it may seem a little difficult to enter ; but if you make the attempt , you will find every obstacle easy to be removed .
mr. dinsmoor , my beloved agent to your nation , being here , i send you this talk by him .
he will have it interpreted to you , and particularly explain my meaning .
beloved cherokees , 
 you now find that the game with which your woods once abounded , are growing scarce ; and you know when you can not meet a deer or other game to kill , that you must remain hungry ; you know also when you can get no skins by hunting , that the traders will give you neither powder nor cloathing ; and you know that without other implements for tilling the ground than the hoe , you will continue to raise only scanty crops of corn .
hence you are sometimes exposed to suffer much from hunger and cold ; and as the game are lessening in numbers more and more , these sufferings will increase .
and how are you to provide against them ?
listen to my words and you will know .
my beloved cherokees , 
 some among you already experience the advantage of keeping cattle and hogs : let all keep them and increase their numbers , and you will ever have a plenty 
 of meet .
to these add sheep , and they will give you cloathing as well as food .
your lands are good and of great extent .
by proper management you can raise live stock not only for your own wants , but to sell to the white people .
by using the plow you can vastly increase your crops of corn .
you can also grow wheat , ( which makes the best bread ) as well as other useful grain .
to these you will easily add flax and cotton , which you may dispose of to the white people , or have it made up by your own women into cloathing for yourselves .
your wives and daughters can soon learn to spin and weave ; and to make this certain , i have directed mr. dinsmoor , to procure all the necessary apparatus for spinning and weaving , and to hire a woman to teach the use of them .
he will also procure some plows and other implements of husbandry , with which to begin the improved cultivation of the ground which i recommend , and employ a fit person to shew you how they are to be used .
i have further directed him to procure some cattle and sheep for the most prudent and industrious men , who shall be willing to exert themselves in tilling the ground and raising those useful animals .
he is often to talk with you on these subjects , and give you all necessary information to promote your success .
i must therefore desire you to listen to him ; and to follow his advice .
i appointed him to dwell among you as the agent of the united states , because i judged him to be a faithful man , ready to obey my instructions and to do you good .
but the cares of the united states are not confined to your single nation .
they extend to all the indians dwelling on their borders .
for which reason other agents are appointed ; and for the four southern nations there will be a general or principal agent who will visit all of them , for the purpose of maintaining peace and friendship among them and with the united states ; to superintend all their affairs ; and to assist the particular agents with each nation in doing the business assigned them .
to such general or principal agent i must desire your careful attention .
he will be one of our greatly beloved men .
his whole time will be employed in contriving how to do you good , and you will therefore act wisely to follow his advice .
the first general or principal agent will be colonel benjamin hawkins , a man already known and respected by you .
i have chosen him for this office because he is esteemed for a good man ; has a knowledge of indian customs , and a particular love and friendship for all the southern tribes .
beloved cherokees , 
 what i have recommended to you i am myself going to do .
after a few moons are passed i shall leave the great town and retire to my farm .
there i shall attend to the means of increasing my cattle , sheep and other useful animals ; to the growing of corn , wheat , and other grain , and to the employing of women in spinning and weaving ; all which i have recommended to you , that you may be as comfortable and happy as plenty of food , clothing and other good things can make you .
beloved cherokees , 
 when i have retired to my farm i shall hear of you ; and it will give me great pleasure to know that you have taken my advice , and are walking in the path which i have described .
but before i retire , i shall speak to my beloved man , the secretary of war , to get prepared some medals , to be given to such cherokees as by following my advice shall best deserve them .
for this purpose mr. dinsmoor is from time to time to visit every town in your nation .
he will give instructions to those who desire to learn what i have recommended .
he will see what improvements are made ; who are most industrious in raising cattle ; in growing corn , wheat , cotton and flax ; and in spinning and weaving ; and on those who excel these rewards are to be bestowed .
beloved cherokees , 
 the advice i here give you is important as it regards your nation ; but still 
 more important as the event of the experiment made with you may determine the 
 lot of many nations .
if it succeeds , the beloved men of the united states will be encouraged to give the same assistance to all the indian tribes within their boundaries .
but if it should fail , they may think it vain to make any further attempts to better the condition of any indian tribe ; for the richness of the soil and mildness of the air render your country highly favorable for the practice of what i have recommended .
beloved cherokees , 
 the wise men of the united states meet together once a year , to consider what 
 will be for the good of all their people .
the wise men of each separate state also meet together once or twice every year , to consult and do what is good for the people of their respective states .
i have thought that a meeting of your wise men once or twice a year would be alike useful to you .
every town might send one or two of its wisest counsellors to talk together on the affairs of your nation , and to recommend to your people whatever they should think would be serviceable .
the beloved agent of the united states would meet with them .
he would give them information of those things which are found good by the white people , and which your situation will enable you to adopt .
he would explain to them the laws made by the great council of the united states , for the preservation of peace ; for the protection of your lands ; for the security of your persons ; for your improvement in the arts of living , and for promoting your general welfare .
if it should be agreeable to you that your wise men should hold such meetings , you will speak your mind to my beloved man , mr. dinsmoor , to be communicated to the president of the united states , who will give such directions as shall be proper .
beloved cherokees , 
 that this talk may be known to all your nation , and not forgotten , i have caused it to be printed , and directed one , signed by my own hand , to be lodged in each of your towns .
the interpreters will , on proper occasions , read and interpret the same to all your people .
beloved cherokees , 
 having been informed that some of your chiefs wished to see me in philadelphia , i have sent them word that i would receive a few of the most esteemed .
i now repeat that i shall be glad to see a small number of your wisest chiefs ; but i shall not expect them ' till november .
i shall take occasion to agree with them on the running of the boundary line between your lands and ours , agreeably to the treaty of holston .
i shall expect them to inform me what chiefs are to attend the running of this line , and i shall tell them whom i appoint to run it ; and the time and place of beginning may then be fixed .
i now send my best wishes to the cherokees , and pray the great spirit to preserve them .

i trust i do not deceive myself when i indulge the persuasion that i have never met you at any period when more than at the present the situation of our public affairs has afforded just cause for mutual congratulation , and for inviting you to join with me in profound gratitude to the author of all good for the numerous and extraordinary blessings we enjoy .
the termination of the long , expensive , and distressing war in which we have been engaged with certain indians northwest of the ohio is placed in the option of the united states by a treaty which the commander of our army has concluded provisionally with the hostile tribes in that region .
in the adjustment of the terms the satisfaction of the indians was deemed worthy no less of the policy than of the liberality of the united states as the necessary basis of durable tranquillity .
the object , it is believed , has been fully attained .
the articles agreed upon will immediately be laid before the senate for their consideration .
the creek and cherokee indians , who alone of the southern tribes had annoyed our frontiers , have lately confirmed their preexisting treaties with us , and were giving evidence of a sincere disposition to carry them into effect by the surrender of the prisoners and property they had taken .
but we have to lament that the fair prospect in this quarter has been once more clouded by wanton murders , which some citizens of georgia are represented to have recently perpetrated on hunting parties of the creeks , which have again subjected that frontier to disquietude and danger , which will be productive of further expense , and may occasion more effusion of blood .
measures are pursuing to prevent or mitigate the usual consequences of such outrages , and with the hope of their succeeding at least to avert general hostility .
a letter from the emperor of morocco announces to me his recognition of our treaty made with his father , the late emperor , and consequently the continuance of peace with that power .
with peculiar satisfaction i add that information has been received from an agent deputed on our part to algiers importing that the terms of the treaty with the day and regency of that country had been adjusted in such a manner as to authorize the expectation of a speedy peace and the resolution of our unfortunate fellow citizens from a grievous captivity .
the latest advices from our envoy at the court of madrid give , moreover , the pleasing information that he had assurances of a speedy and satisfactory conclusion of his negotiation .
while the event depending upon unadjusted particulars can not be regarded as ascertained , it is agreeable to cherish the expectation of an issue which , securing amicably very essential interests of the united states , will at the same time lay the foundation of lasting harmony with a power whose friendship we have uniformly and sincerely desired to cultivate .
though not before officially disclosed to the house of representatives , you , gentlemen , are all apprised that a treaty of amity , commerce , and navigation has been negotiated with great britain , and that the senate have advised and consented to its ratification upon a condition which excepts part of one article .
agreeably thereto , and to the best judgment i was able to form of the public interest after full and mature deliberation , i have added my sanction .
the result on the part of his britannic majesty is unknown .
when received , the subject will without delay be placed before congress .
this interesting summary of our affairs with regard to the foreign powers between whom and the united states controversies have subsisted , and with regard also to those of our indian neighbors with whom we have been in a state of enmity or misunderstanding , opens a wide field for consoling and gratifying reflections .
if by prudence and moderation on every side the extinguishment of all the causes of external discord which have heretofore menaced our tranquillity , on terms compatible with our national rights and honor , shall be the happy result , how firm and how precious a foundation will have been laid for accelerating , maturing , and establishing the prosperity of our country .
contemplating the internal situation as well as the external relations of the united states , we discover equal cause for contentment and satisfaction .
while many of the nations of europe , with their american dependencies , have been involved in a contest unusually bloody , exhausting , and calamitous , in which the evils of foreign war have been aggravated by domestic convulsion and insurrection ; in which many of the arts most useful to society have been exposed to discouragement and decay ; in which scarcity of subsistence has imbittered other sufferings ; while even the anticipations of a return of the blessings of peace and repose are alloyed by the sense of heavy and accumulating burthens , which press upon all the departments of industry and threaten to clog the future springs of government , our favored country , happy in a striking contrast , has enjoyed tranquillity -- a tranquillity the more satisfactory because maintained at the expense of no duty .
faithful to ourselves , we have violated no obligation to others .
our agriculture , commerce , and manufactures prosper beyond former example , the molestations of our trade ( to prevent a continuance of which , however , very pointed remonstrances have been made ) being overbalanced by the aggregate benefits which it derives from a neutral position .
our population advances with a celerity which , exceeding the most sanguine calculations , proportionally augments our strength and resources , and guarantees our future security .
every part of the union displays indications of rapid and various improvement ; and with burthens so light as scarcely to be perceived , with resources fully adequate to our present exigencies , with governments founded on the genuine principles of rational liberty , and with mild and wholesome laws , is it too much to say that our country exhibits a spectacle of national happiness never surpassed , if ever before equaled ?
placed in a situation every way so auspicious , motives of commanding force impel us , with sincere acknowledgment to heaven and pure love to our country , to unite our efforts to preserve , prolong , and improve our immense advantages .
to cooperate with you in this desirable work is a fervent and favorite wish of my heart .
it is a valuable ingredient in the general estimate of our welfare that the part of our country which was lately the scene of disorder and insurrection now enjoys the blessings of quiet and order .
the misled have abandoned their errors , and pay the respect to our constitution and laws which is due from good citizens to the public authorities of the society .
these circumstances have induced me to pardon generally the offenders here referred to , and to extend forgiveness to those who had been adjudged to capital punishment .
for though i shall always think it a sacred duty to exercise with firmness and energy the constitutional powers with which i am vested , yet it appears to me no less consistent with the public good than it is with my personal feelings to mingle in the operations of government every degree of moderation and tenderness which the national justice , dignity , and safety may permit .
gentlemen : among the objects which will claim your attention in the course of the session , a review of our military establishment is not the least important .
it is called for by the events which have changed , and may be expected still further to change , the relative situation of our frontiers .
in this review you will doubtless allow due weight to the considerations that the questions between us and certain foreign powers are not yet finally adjusted , that the war in europe is not yet terminated , and that our western posts , when recovered , will demand provision for garrisoning and securing them .
a statement of our present military force will be laid before you by the department of war .
with the review of our army establishment is naturally connected that of the militia .
it will merit inquiry what imperfections in the existing plan further experience may have unfolded .
the subject is of so much moment in my estimation as to excite a constant solicitude that the consideration of it may be renewed until the greatest attainable perfection shall be accomplished .
time is wearing away some advantages for forwarding the object , while none better deserves the persevering attention of the public councils .
while we indulge the satisfaction which the actual condition of our western borders so well authorizes , it is necessary that we should not lose sight of an important truth which continually receives new confirmations , namely , that the provisions heretofore made with a view to the protection of the indians from the violences of the lawless part of our frontier inhabitants are insufficient .
it is demonstrated that these violences can now be perpetrated with impunity , and it can need no argument to prove that unless the murdering of indians can be restrained by bringing the murderers to condign punishment , all the exertions of the government to prevent destructive retaliations by the indians will prove fruitless and all our present agreeable prospects illusory .
the frequent destruction of innocent women and children , who are chiefly the victims of retaliation , must continue to shock humanity , and an enormous expense to drain the treasury of the union .
to enforce upon the indians the observance of justice it is indispensable that there shall be competent means of rendering justice to them .
if these means can be devised by the wisdom of congress , and especially if there can be added an adequate provision for supplying the necessities of the indians on reasonable terms ( a measure the mention of which i the more readily repeat , as in all the conferences with them they urge it with solicitude ) , i should not hesitate to entertain a strong hope of rendering our tranquillity permanent .
i add with pleasure that the probability even of their civilization is not diminished by the experiments which have been thus far made under the auspices of government .
the accomplishment of this work , if practicable , will reflect undecaying luster on our national character and administer the most grateful consolations that virtuous minds can know .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : 
 the state of our revenue , with the sums which have been borrowed and reimbursed pursuant to different acts of congress , will be submitted from the proper department , together with an estimate of the appropriations necessary to be made for the service of the ensuing year .
whether measures may not be advisable to reinforce the provision of the redemption of the public debt will naturally engage your examination .
congress have demonstrated their sense to be , and it were superfluous to repeat mine , that whatsoever will tend to accelerate the honorable extinction of our public debt accords as much with the true interest of our country as with the general sense of our constituents .
gentlemen of the senate and of the house of representatives : 
 the statements which will be laid before you relative to the mint will shew the situation of that institution and the necessity of some further legislative provisions for carrying the business of it more completely into effect , and for checking abuses which appear to be arising in particular quarters .
the progress in providing materials for the frigates and in building them , the state of the fortifications of our harbors , the measures which have been pursued for obtaining proper sites for arsenals and for replenishing our magazines with military stores , and the steps which have been taken toward the execution of the law for opening a trade with the indians will likewise be presented for the information of congress .
temperate discussion of the important subjects which may arise in the course of the session and mutual forbearance where there is a difference of opinion are too obvious and necessary for the peace , happiness , and welfare of our country to need any recommendation of mine .

whereas the commissioners appointed by the president of the united states to confer with the citizens in the western counties of pennsylvania during the late insurrection which prevailed therein , by their act and agreement bearing date the 2d day of september last , in pursuance of the powers in them vested , did promise and engage that if assurances of submission to the laws of the united states should be bona fide given by the citizens resident in the fourth survey of pennsylvania , in the manner and within the time in the said act and agreement specified , a general pardon should be granted on the 10th day of july then next ensuing of all treasons and other indictable offenses against the united states committed within the said survey before the 22d day of august last , excluding therefrom , nevertheless , every person who should refuse or neglect to subscribe such assurance and engagement in manner aforesaid , or who should after such subscription violate the same , or will fully obstruct or attempt to obstruct the execution of the acts for raising a revenue on distilled spirits and stills , or be aiding or abetting therein ; and 
 whereas i have since thought proper to extend ' the said pardon to all persons guilty of the said treasons , misprisions of treasons , or otherwise concerned in the late insurrection within the survey aforesaid who have not since been indicted or convicted thereof , or of any other offense against the united states : 
 therefore be it known that i , george washington , president of the said united states , have granted , and by these presents do grant , a full , free , and entire pardon to all persons ( excepting as is hereinafter excepted ) of all treasons , misprisions of treason , and other indictable offenses against the united states committed within the fourth survey of pennsylvania before the said 22d day of august last past , excepting and excluding therefrom , nevertheless , every person who refused or neglected to give and subscribe the said assurances in the manner aforesaid ( or having subscribed hath violated the same ) and now standeth indicted or convicted of any treason , misprision of treason , or other offense against the said united states , hereby remitting and releasing unto all persons , except as before excepted , all penalties incurred , or supposed to be incurred , for or on account of the premises .

i the president of the united states , by my own mouth , and by a written speech signed with my own hand [ and sealed with the seal of the u s ] speak to the seneka nation , and desire their attention , and that they would keep this speech in remembrance of the friendship of the united states .
i have received your speech with satisfaction , as a proof of your confidence in the justice of the united states , and i have attentively examined the several objects which you have laid before me , whether delivered by your chiefs at tioga point in the last month to colonel pickering , or laid before me in the present month by the cornplanter and the other seneca chiefs now in philadelphia .
in the first place i observe to you , and i request it may sink deep in your minds , that it is my desire , and the desire of the united states that all the miseries of the late war should be forgotten and buried forever .
that in future the united states and the six nations should be truly brothers , promoting each other 's prosperity by acts of mutual friendship and justice .
i am not uninformed that the six nations have been led into some difficulties with respect to the sale of their lands since the peace .
but i must inform you that these evils arose before the present government of the united states was established , when the separate states and individuals under their authority , undertook to treat with the indian tribes respecting the sale of their lands .
but the case is now entirely altered .
the general government only has the power , to treat with the indian nations , and any treaty formed and held without its authority will not be binding .
here then is the security for the remainder of your lands .
no state nor person can purchase your lands , unless at some public treaty held under the authority of the united states .
the general government will never consent to your being defrauded .
but it will protect you in all your just rights .
hear well , and let it be heard by every person in your nation , that the president of the united states declares , that the general government considers itself bound to protect you in all the lands secured you by the treaty of fort stanwix , the 22d of october 1784 , excepting such parts as you may since had fairly sold to persons properly authorized to purchase of you .
you complain that john livingston and oliver phelps have obtained your lands , assisted by mr. street of niagara , and they have not complied with their agreement .
it appears upon enquiry of the governor of new york , that john livingston was not legally authorized to treat with you , and that every thing he did with you has been declared null and void , so that you may rest easy on that account .
but it does not appear from any proofs yet in the possession of government , that oliver phelps has defrauded you .
if however you should have any just cause of complaint against him , and can make satisfactory proof thereof , the federal courts will be open to you for redress , as to all other persons .
but your great object seems to be the security of your remaining lands , and i have therefore upon this point , meant to be sufficiently strong and clear .
that in future you can not be defrauded of your lands .
that you possess the right to sell , and the right of refusing to sell your lands .
that therefore the sale of your lands in future , will depend entirely upon yourselves .
but that when you may find it for your interest to sell any parts of your lands , the united states must be present by their agent , and will be your security that you shall not be defrauded in the bargain you may make .
[ it will however be important , that before you make any sales of your land that you should determine among yourselves , who are the persons among you that shall give sure conveyances thereof as shall be binding upon your nation and forever preclude all disputes related to the validity of the sale . ]
that besides the [ before mentioned ] security for your land , you will perceive by the law of congress , for regulating trade and intercourse with the indian tribes , the fatherly care the united states intend to take of the indians .
for the particular meaning of this law , i refer you to the explanations given thereof by colonel pickering at tioga , which with the law , are herewith delivered to you .
you have said in your speech " that the game is going away from among you , and that you thought it the design of the great spirit , that you should till the ground , but before you speak upon this subject , you want to know whether the united states meant to leave you any land to till ? "
you now know that all the lands secured to you by the treaty of fort stanwix , excepting such parts as you may since have fairly sold are yours , and that only your own acts can convey them away ; speak therefore your wishes on the subject of tilling the ground .
the united states will be happy to afford you every assistance in the only business which will add to your numbers and happiness .
the murders that have been committed upon some of your people , by the bad white men i sincerely lament and reprobate , and i earnestly hope that the real murderers will be secured , and punished as they deserve .
this business has been sufficiently explained to you here , by the governor of pennsylvania , and by colonel pickering on behalf of the united states , at tioga .
the senekas may be assured , that the rewards offered for apprehending the murderers , will be continued until they are secured for trial , and that when they shall be apprehended , that they will be tried and punished as if they had killed white men .
having answered the most material parts of your speech , i shall inform you , that some bad indians , and the outcast of several tribes who reside at the miamee village , have long continued their murders and depredations upon the frontiers , lying along the ohio .
that they have not only refused to listen to my voice inviting them to peace , but that upon receiving it , they renewed their incursions and murders with greater violence than ever .
i have therefore been obliged to strike those bad people , in order to make them sensible of their madness .
i sincerely hope they will hearken to reason , and not require to be further chastised .
the united states desire to be the friends of the indians , upon terms of justice and humanity .
but they will not suffer the depredations of the bad indians to go unpunished .
my desire is that you would caution all the senekas and six nations , to .
prevent their rash young men from joining the miamee indians .
for the united states can not distinguish the tribes to which bad indians belong , and every tribe must take care of their own people .
the merits of the cornplanter , and his friendship for the united states are well known to me , and shall not be forgotten .
and as a mark of the esteem of the united states , i have directed the secretary of war to make him a present of two hundred and fifty dollars , either in money or goods , as the cornplanter shall like best .
and he may depend upon the future care and kindness of the united states .
and i have also directed the secretary of war to make suitable presents to the other chiefs present in philadelphia .
and also that some further tokens of friendship to be forwarded to the other chiefs , now in their nation .
remember my words senekas , continue to be strong in your friendship for the united states , as the only rational ground of your future happiness , and you may rely upon their kindness and protection .
an agent shall soon be appointed to reside in some place convenient to the senekas and six nations .
he will represent the united states .
apply to him on all occasions .
if any man brings you evil reports of the intentions of the united states , mark that man as your enemy , for he will mean to deceive you and lead you into trouble .
the united states will be true and faithful to their engagements .

fellow - citizens : 
 i am again called upon by the voice of my country to execute the functions of its chief magistrate .
when the occasion proper for it shall arrive , i shall endeavour to express the high sense i entertain of this distinguished honor , and of the confidence which has been reposed in me by the people of united america .
previous to the execution of any official act of the president , the constitution requires an oath of office .
this oath i am now about to take , and in your presence , 56 that if it shall be found during my administration of the government i have in any instance violated willingly , or knowingly , the injunction thereof , i may ( besides incurring constitutional punishmt ) be subject to the upbraidings of all who are now witnesses of the present solemn ceremony .

i meet you , upon the present occasion , with the feelings which are naturally inspired by a strong impression of the prosperous situation of our common country , and by a persuasion equally strong that the labours of the present45 session , which has just commenced , will , under the guidance of a spirit no less prudent than patriotic , issue in measures , conducive to the stability and increase of national prosperity .
numerous as are the providential blessings which demand our grateful acknowledgments ; the abundance with which another year has again rewarded the industry of the husbandman is too important to escape recollection .
your own observations , in your respective situations , will have satisfied you of the progressive state of agriculture , manufactures , commerce and navigation : in tracing their causes , you will have remarked , with particular pleasure , the happy effects of that revival of confidence , public as well as private , to which the constitution and laws of the united states have so eminently contributed : and you will have observed , with no less interest , new and decisive proofs of the increasing reputation and credit of the nation .
but you nevertheless , can not fail to derive satisfaction from the confirmation of these circumstances , which will be disclosed , in the several official communications , that will be made to you in the course of your deliberations .
the rapid subscriptions to the bank of the united states , which completed the sum allowed to be subscribed , in a single day , is among the striking and pleasing evidences which present themselves , not only of confidence in the government , but of resource in the community .
in the interval of your recess due attention has been paid to the execution of the different objects which were specially provided for by the laws and resolutions of the last session .
among the most important of these is the defence and security of the western frontiers .
to accomplish it on the most humane principles was a primary wish .
accordingly , at the same time that treaties have been provisionally concluded , and other proper means used to attach the wavering , and to confirm in their friendship , the well - disposed tribes of indians ; effectual measures have been adopted to make those of a hostile description sensible that a pacification was desired upon terms of moderation and justice .
these measures having proved unsuccessful , it became necessary to convince the refractory of the power of the united states to punish their depredations .
offensive operations have therefore been directed ; to be conducted however , as consistently as possible with the dictates of humanity .
some of these have been crowned with full success , and others are yet depending .
the expeditions which have been completed were carried on under the authority , and at the expense of the united states by the militia of kentucke ; whose enterprise , intripidity and good conduct , are entitled to peculiar commendation .
overtures of peace are still continued to the deluded tribes , and considerable numbers of individuals belonging to them , have lately renounced all further opposition , removed from their former situations , and placed themselves under the immediate protection of the united states .
it is sincerely to be desired that all need of coercion , in future , may cease ; and that an intimate intercourse may succeed ; calculated to advance the happiness of the indians , and to attach them firmly to the united states .
in order to this it seems necessary : that they should experience the benefits of an impartial administration 46 of justice .
that the mode of alienating their lands the main source of discontent and war , should be so defined and regulated , as to obviate imposition , and , as far as may be practicable , controversy concerning the reality , and extent of the alienations which are made .
that commerce with them should be promoted under regulations tending to secure an equitable deportment towards them , and that such rational experiments should be made , for imparting to them the blessings of civilization , as may , from time to time suit their condition .
that the executive of the united states should be enabled to employ the means to which the indians have been long accustomed for uniting their immediate interests with the preservation of peace .
and that efficatious provision should be made for inflicting adequate penalties upon all those who , by violating their rights , shall infringe the treaties , and endanger the peace of the union .
a system corrisponding with the mild principles of religion and philanthropy towards an unenlightened race of men , whose happiness materially depends on the conduct of the united states , would be as honorable to the national character as conformable to the dictates of sound policy .
the powers specially vested in me by the act laying certain duties on distilled spirits , which respect the subdivisions of the districts into surveys , the appointment of officers , and the assignment of compensations , have likewise been carried into effect .
in a matter in which both materials and experience were wanting to guide the calculation , it will be readily conceived that there must have been difficulty in such an adjustment of the rates of compensation as would conciliate a reasonable competency with a proper regard to the limits prescribed by the law .
it is hoped that the circumspection , which has been used will be found in the result to have secured the last of the two objects ; but it is probable , that with a view to the first , in some instances , a revision of the provision will be found adviseable .
the impressions with which this law has been received by the community , have been , upon the whole , such as were to be expected among enlightened and well - disposed citizens , from the propriety and necessity of the measure .
the novelty , however of the tax , in a considerable part of the united states , and a misconception of some of its provisions , have given occasion , in particular places to some degree of discontent .
but it is satisfactory to know that this disposition yields to proper explanations and more just apprehensions of the true nature of the law .
and i entertain a full confidence , that it will , in all , give way to motives which arise out of a just sense of duty , and a virtuous regard to the public welfare .
if there are any circumstances , in the law , which consistently with its main design , may be so varied as to remove any well intentioned objections , that may happen to exist , it will consist with a wise moderation to make the proper variations .
it is desirable on all occasions , to unite with a steady and firm adherence to constitutional and necessary acts of government , the fullest evidence of a disposition , as far as may be practicable , to consult the wishes of every part of the community , and to lay the foundations of the public administration in the affection 47 of the people .
pursuant to the authority contained in the several acts on that subject , a district of ten miles square for the permanent seat of the government of the united states has been fixed , and announced by proclamation ; which district will comprehend lands on both sides of the river potomack , and the towns of alexandria and george town .
a city has also been laid out agreeably to a plan which will be placed before congress : and as there is a prospect , favoured by the rate of sales which have already taken place , of ample funds for carrying on the necessary public buildings , there is every expectation of their due progress .
the completion of the census of the inhabitants , for which provision was made by law , has been duly notified ( excepting in one instance in which the return has been informal , and another in which it has been omitted or miscarried ) and the returns of the officers , who were charged with this duty , which will be laid before you , will give you the pleasing assurance that the present population of the united states borders on four millions of persons .
it is proper also to inform you that a further loan of two millions and a half of florins has been completed in holland ; the terms of which are similar to those of the one last announced , except as to a small reduction of charges .
another on like terms , for six millions of florins , had been set on foot under circumstances that assured immediate completion .
gentlemen of the senate : 
 two treaties , which have been provisionally concluded with the cherokees and six nations of indians , will be laid before you for your consideration and ratification .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : 
 in entering upon the discharge of your legislative trust , you must anticipate with pleasure , that many of the difficulties , necessarily incident to the first arrangements of a new government , for an extensive country , have been happily surmounted by the zealous , and judicious exertions of your predecessors , in co - operation with the other branch of the legislature .
the important objects , which remain to be accomplished , will , i am persuaded , be conducted upon principles equally comprehensive , and equally well calculated for the advancement of the general weal .
the time limited for receiving subscriptions to the loans proposed by the act making provision for the debt of the united states having expired , statements from the proper department will , as soon as possible , apprize you of the exact result .
enough , however is already known , to afford an assurance that the views of that act have been substantially fulfilled .
the subscription in the domestic debt of the united states , has embraced by far the greatest proportion of that debt ; affording at the same time proof of the general satisfaction of the public creditors with the system which has been proposed to their acceptance , and of the spirit of accommodation to the convenience of the government with which they are actuated .
the subscriptions in the debts of the respective states , as far as the provisions of the law have permitted , may be said to be yet more general .
the part of the debt of the united states , which remains unsubscribed , will naturally engage your further deliberations .
it is particularly pleasing to me to be able to announce to you , that the revenues which have been established , promise to be adequate to their objects ; and may be permitted , if no unforeseen exigency occurs , to supercede , for the present , the necessity of any new burthens upon our constituents .
an object which will claim your early attention , is , a provision for the current service of the ensuing year , together with such ascertained demands upon the treasury as require to be immediately discharged ; and such casualties as may have arisen in the execution of the public business , for which no specific appropriations may have yet been made ; of all which a proper estimate will be laid before you .
gentlement of the senate , and of the house of representatives : 
 i shall content myself with a general reference to former communications for several objects , upon which the urgency of other affairs has hitherto postponed any definite resolution .
their importance will recall them to your attention ; and i trust that the progress already made in the most arduous arrangements of the government , will afford you leisure to resume them with advantage .
there are , however , some of them of which i can not forbear a more particular mention .
these are , the militia ; the post - office and post - roads ; the mint ; weights and measures ; a provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the united states .
the first is certainly an object of primary importance , whether viewed in reference to the national security , to the satisfaction of the community , or to the preservation of order .
in connection with this , the establishment of competent magazines and arsenals , and the fortification of such places as are peculiarly important and vulnerable , naturally present themselves to consideration .
the safety of the united states , under divine protection , ought to rest on the basis of systematic and solid arrangements ; exposed as little as possible to the hazard of fortuitous circumstances .
the importance of the post - office and post - roads , on a plan sufficiently liberal and comprehensive , as they respect the expedition , safety and facility of communication , is increased by the instrumentality in diffusing a knowledge of the laws and proceedings of the government ; which , while it contributes to the security of the people , serves also to guard them against the effects of misrepresentation and misconception .
the establishment of additional cross - posts , especially to some of the important points in the western and northern parts of the union , can not fail to be of material utility .
the disorders in the existing currency , and especially the scarcity of small change , a scarcity so peculiarly distressing to the poorer classes , strongly recommend the carrying into immediate effect the resolution already entered into concerning the establishment of a mint .
measures have been taken , pursuant to that resolution , for procuring some of the most necessary artists , together with the requisite apparatus .
an uniformity in the weights and measures of the country is among the important objects submitted to you by the constitution , and if it can be derived from a standard at once invariable and universal , must be no less honorable to the public councils than conducive to the public convenience .
a provision for the sale of the vacant lands of the united states is particularly urged , among other reasons , by the important considerations that they are pledged as a fund for reimbursing the public debt ; that if timely and judiciously applied , they may save the necessity of burthening our citizens with new taxes for the extinguishment of the principal ; and that being free to discharge the principal but in a limited proportion no opportunity ought to be lost for availing the public of its right .

