gentlemen of the congress : 
 in pursuance of my constitutional duty to " give to the congress information of the state of the union , " i take the liberty of addressing you on several matters which ought , as it seems to me , particularly to engage the attention of your honorable bodies , as of all who study the welfare and progress of the nation .
i shall ask your indulgence if i venture to depart in some degree from the usual custom of setting before you in formal review the many matters which have engaged the attention and called for the action of the several departments of the government or which look to them for early treatment in the future , because the list is long , very long , and would suffer in the abbreviation to which i should have to subject it .
i shall submit to you the reports of the heads of the several departments , in which these subjects are set forth in careful detail , and beg that they may receive the thoughtful attention of your committees and of all members of the congress who may have the leisure to study them .
their obvious importance , as constituting the very substance of the business of the government , makes comment and emphasis on my part unnecessary .
the country , i am thankful to say , is at peace with all the world , and many happy manifestations multiply about us of a growing cordiality and sense of community of interest among the nations , foreshadowing an age of settled peace and good will .
more and more readily each decade do the nations manifest their willingness to bind themselves by solemn treaty to the processes of peace , the processes of frankness and fair concession .
so far the united states has stood at the front of such negotiations .
she will , i earnestly hope and confidently believe , give fresh proof of her sincere adherence to the cause of international friendship by ratifying the several treaties of arbitration awaiting renewal by the senate .
in addition to these , it has been the privilege of the department of state to gain the assent , in principle , of no less than 31 nations , representing four - fifths of the population of the world , to the negotiation of treaties by which it shall be agreed that whenever differences of interest or of policy arise which can not be resolved by the ordinary processes of diplomacy they shall be publicly analyzed , discussed , and reported upon by a tribunal chosen by the parties before either nation determines its course of action .
there is only one possible standard by which to determine controversies between the united states and other nations , and that is com- pounded of these two elements : our own honor and our obligations to the peace of the world .
a test so compounded ought easily to be made to govern both the establishment of new treaty obligations and the interpretation of those already assumed .
there is but one cloud upon our horizon .
that has shown itself to the south of us , and hangs over mexico .
there can be no certain prospect of peace in america until gen. huerta has surrendered his usurped authority in mexico ; until it is understood on all hands , indeed , that such pretended governments will not be countenanced or dealt with by - the government of the united states .
we are the friends of constitutional government in america ; we are more than its friends , we are its champions ; because in no other way can our neighbors , to whom we would wish in every way to make proof of our friendship , work out their own development in peace and liberty .
mexico has no government .
the attempt to maintain one at the city of mexico has broken down , and a mere military despotism has been set up which has hardly more than the semblance of national authority .
it originated in the usurpation of victoriano huerta , who , after a brief attempt to play the part of constitutional president , has at last cast aside even the pretense of legal right and declared himself dictator .
as a consequence , a condition of affairs now exists in mexico which has made it doubtful whether even the most elementary and fundamental rights either of her own people or of the citizens of other countries resident within her territory can long be successfully safeguarded , and which threatens , if long continued , to imperil the interests of peace , order , and tolerable life in the lands immediately to the south of us .
even if the usurper had succeeded in his purposes , in despite of the constitution of the republic and the rights of its people , he would have set up nothing but a precarious and hateful power , which could have lasted but a little while , and whose eventual downfall would have left the country in a more deplorable condition than ever .
but he has not succeeded .
he has forfeited the respect and the moral support even of those who were at one time willing to see him succeed .
little by little he has been completely isolated .
by a little every day his power and prestige are crumbling and the collapse is not far away .
we shall not , 1 believe , be obliged to alter our policy of watchful waiting .
and then , when the end comes , we shall hope to see constitutional order restored in distressed mexico by the concert and energy of such of her leaders as prefer the liberty of their people to their own ambitions .
i turn to matters of domestic concern .
you already have under consideration a bill for the reform of our system of banking and currency , for which the country waits with impatience , as for something fundamental to its whole business life and necessary to set credit free from arbitrary and artificial restraints .
i need not say how earnestly i hope for its early enactment into law .
i take leave to beg that the whole energy and attention of the senate be concentrated upon it till the matter is successfully disposed of .
and yet i feel that the request is not needed - that the members of that great house need no urging in this service to the country .
i present to you , in addition , the urgent necessity that special provision be made also for facilitating the credits needed by the farmers of the country .
the pending currency bill does the farmers a great service .
it puts them upon an equal footinig with other business men and masters of enterprise , as it should ; and upon its passage they will find themselves quit of many of the difficulties which now hamper them in the field of credit .
the farmers , of course , ask and should be given no special privilege , such as extending to them the credit of the government itself .
what they need and should obtain is legislation which will make their own abundant and substantial credit resources available as a foundation for joint , concerted local action in their own behalf in getting the capital they must use .
it is to this we should now address ourselves .
it has , singularly enough , come to pass that we have allowed the industry of our farms to lag behind the other activities of the country in its development .
i need not stop to tell you how fundamental to the life of the nation is the production of its food .
our thoughts may ordinarily be concentrated upon the cities and the hives of industry , upon the cries of the crowded market place and the clangor of the factory , but it is from the quiet interspaces of the open valleys and the free hillsides that we draw the sources of life and of prosperity , from the farm and the ranch , from the forest and the mine .
without these every street would be silent , every office deserted , every factory fallen into disrepair .
and yet the farmer does not stand upon the same footing with the forester and the miner in the market of credit .
he is the servant of the seasons .
nature determines how long he must wait for his crops , and will not be hurried in her processes .
he may give his note , but the season of its maturity depends upon the season when his crop matures , lies at the gates of the market where his products are sold .
and the security he gives is of a character not known in the broker 's office or as familiarly as it might be on the counter of the banker .
the agricultural department of the government is seeking to assist as never before to make farming an efficient business , of wide co - operative effort , in quick touch with the markets for foodstuffs .
the farmers and the government will henceforth work together as real partners in this field , where we now begin to see our way very clearly and where many intelligent plans are already being put into execution .
the treasury of the united states has , by a timely and well - considered distribution of its deposits , facilitated the moving of the crops in the present season and prevented the scarcity of available funds too often experienced at such times .
but we must not allow ourselves to depend upon extraordinary expedients .
we must add the means by which the , farmer may make his credit constantly and easily available and command when he will the capital by which to support and expand his business .
we lag behind many other great countries of the modern world in attempting to do this .
systems of rural credit have been studied and developed on the other side of the water while we left our farmers to shift for themselves in the ordinary money market .
you have but to look about you in any rural district to see the result , the handicap and embarrassment which nave been put upon those who produce our food .
conscious of this backwardness and neglect on our part , the congress recently authorized the creation of a special commission to study the various systems of rural credit which have been put into operation in europe , and this commission is already prepared to report .
its report ought to make it easier for us to determine what methods will be best suited to our own farmers .
i hope and believe that the committees of the senate and house will address themselves to this matter with the most fruitful results , and i believe that the studies and recently formed plans of the department of agriculture may be made to serve them very greatly in their work of framing appropriate and adequate legislation .
it would be indiscreet and presumptuous in anyone to dogmatize upon so great and many - sided a question , but i feel confident that common counsel will produce the results we must all desire .
turn from the farm to the world of business which centers in the city and in the factory , and i think that all thoughtful observers will agree that the immediate service we owe the business communities of the country is to prevent private monopoly more effectually than it has yet been prevented .
i think it will be easily agreed that we should let the sherman anti - trust law stand , unaltered , as it is , with its debatable ground about it , but that we should as much as possible reduce the area of that debatable ground by further and more explicit legislation ; and should also supplement that great act by legislation which will not only clarify it but also facilitate its administration and make it fairer to all concerned .
no doubt we shall all wish , and the country will expect , this to be the central subject of our deliberations during the present session ; but it is a subject so manysided and so deserving of careful and discriminating discussion that 1 shall take the liberty of addressing you upon it in a special message at a later date than this .
it is of capital importance that the business men of this country should be relieved of all uncertainties of law with regard to their enterprises and investments and a clear path indicated which they can travel without anxiety .
it is as important that they should be relieved of embarrassment and set free to prosper as that private monopoly should be destroyed .
the ways of action should be thrown wide open .
i turn to a subject which i hope can be handled promptly and without serious controversy of any kind .
i mean the method of selecting nominees for the presidency of the united states .
i feel confident that i do not misinterpret the wishes or the expectations of the country when i urge the prompt enactment of legislation which will provide for primary elections throughout the country at which the voters of the several parties may choose their nominees for the presidency without the intervention of nominating conventions .
i venture the suggestion that this legislation should provide for the retention of party conventions , but only for the purpose of declaring and accepting the verdict of the primaries and formulating the platforms of the parties ; and i suggest that these conventions should consist not of delegates chosen for this single purpose , but of the nominees for congress , the nominees for vacant seats in the senate of the united states , the senators whose terms have not yet closed , the national committees , and the candidates for the presidency themselves , in order that platforms may be framed by those responsible to the people for carrying them into effect .
these are all matters of vital domestic concern , and besides them , outside the charmed circle of our own national life in which our affections command us , as well as our consciences , there stand out our obligations toward our territories over sea .
here we are trustees .
porto rico , hawaii , the philippines , are ours , indeed , but not ours to do what we please with .
such territories , once regarded as mere possessions , are no longer to be selfishly exploited ; they are part of the domain of public conscience and of serviceable and enlightened statesmanship .
we must administer them for the people who live in them and with the same sense of responsibility to them as toward our own people in our domestic affairs .
no doubt we shall successfully enough bind porto rico and the hawaiian islands to ourselves by ties of justice and interest and affection , but the performance of our duty toward the philippines is a more difficult and debatable matter .
we can satisfy the obligations of generous justice toward the people of porto rico by giving them the ample and familiar rights and privileges accorded our own citizens in our own territories and our obligations toward the people of hawaii by perfecting the provisions for self - government already granted them , but in the philippines we must go further .
we must hold steadily in view their ultimate independence , and we must move toward the time of that independence as steadily as the way can be cleared and the foundations thoughtfully and permanently laid .
acting under the authority conferred upon the president by congress , i have already accorded the people of the islands a majority in both houses of their legislative body by appointing five instead of four native citizens to the membership of the commission .
i believe that in this way we shall make proof of their capacity in counsel and their sense of responsibility in the exercise of political power , and that the success of this step will be sure to clear our view for the steps which are to follow .
step by step we should extend and perfect the system of self - government in the islands , making test of them and modifying them as experience discloses their successes and their failures ; that we should more and more put under the control of the native citizens of the archipelago the essential instruments of their life , their local instrumentalities of government , their schools , all the common interests of their communities , and so by counsel and experience set tip a government which all the world will see to be suitable to a people whose affairs are under their own control .
at last , i hope and believe , we are beginning to gain the confidence of the filipino peoples .
by their counsel and experience , rather than by our own , we shall learn how best to serve them and how soon it will be possible and wise to withdraw our supervision .
let us once find the path and set out with firm and confident tread upon it and we shall not wander from it or linger upon it .
a duty faces us with regard to alaska which seems to me very pressing and very imperative ; perhaps i should say a double duty , for it concerns both the political and the material development of the territory .
the people of alaska should be given the full territorial form of government , and alaska , as a storehouse , should be unlocked .
one key to it is a system of railways .
these the government should itself build and administer , and the ports and terminals it should itself control in the interest of all who wish to use them for the service and development of the country and its people .
but the construction of railways is only the first step ; is only thrusting in the key to the storehouse and throwing back the lock and opening the door .
how the tempting resources of the country are to be exploited is another matter , to which i shall take the liberty of from time to time calling your attention , for it is a policy which must be worked out by well - considered stages , not upon theory , but upon lines of practical expediency .
it is part of our general problem of conservation .
we have a freer hand in working out the problem in alaska than in the states of the union ; and yet the principle and object are the same , wherever we touch it .
we must use the resources of the country , not lock them up .
there need be no conflict or jealousy as between state and federal authorities , for there can be no essential difference of purpose between them .
the resources in question must be used , but not destroyed or wasted ; used , but not monopolized upon any narrow idea of individual rights as against the abiding interests of communities .
that a policy can be worked out by conference and concession which will release these resources and yet not jeopard or dissipate them , i for one have no doubt ; and it can be done on lines of regulation which need be no less acceptable to the people and governments of the states concerned than to the people and government of the nation at large , whose heritage these resources are .
we must bend our counsels to this end .
a common purpose ought to make agreement easy .
three or four matters of special importance and significance i beg , that you will permit me to mention in closing .
our bureau of mines ought to be equipped and empowered to render even more effectual service than it renders now in improving the conditions of mine labor and making the mines more economically productive as well as more safe .
this is an all - important part of the work of conservation ; and the conservation of human life and energy lies even nearer to our interests than the preservation from waste of our material resources .
we owe it , in mere justice to the railway employees of the country , to provide for them a fair and effective employers ' liability act ; and a law that we can stand by in this matter will be no less to the advantage of those who administer the railroads of the country than to the advantage of those whom they employ .
the experience of a large number of the states abundantly proves that .
we ought to devote ourselves to meeting pressing demands of plain justice like this as earnestly as to the accomplishment of political and economic reforms .
social justice comes first .
law is the machinery for its realization and is vital only as it expresses and embodies it .
an international congress for the discussion of all questions that affect safety at sea is now sitting in london at the suggestion of our own government .
so soon as the conclusions of that congress can be learned and considered we ought to address ourselves , among other things , to the prompt alleviation of the very unsafe , unjust , and burdensome conditions which now surround the employment of sailors and render it extremely difficult to obtain the services of spirited and competent men such as every ship needs if it is to be safely handled and brought to port .
may i not express the very real pleas - are i have experienced in co - operating with this congress and sharing with it the labors of common service to which it has devoted itself so unreservedly during the past seven months of uncomplaining concentration upon the business of legislation ?
surely it is a proper and pertinent part of my report on " the state of the union " to express my admiration for the diligence , the good temper , and the full comprehension of public duty which has already been manifested by both the houses ; and i hope that it may not be deemed an impertinent intrusion of myself into the picture if i say with how much and how constant satisfaction i have availed myself of the privilege of putting my time and energy at their disposal alike in counsel and in action .

your honor , mr. chairman , ladies , and gentlemen : 
 no american could stand in this place to - day and think of the circumstances which we are come together to celebrate without being most profoundly stirred .
there has come over me since i sat down here a sense of deep solemnity , because it has seemed to me that i saw ghosts crowding a great assemblage of spirits , no longer visible , but whose influence we still feel as we feel the molding power of history itself .
the men who sat in this hall , to whom we now look back with a touch of deep sentiment , were men of flesh and blood , face to face with extremely difficult problems .
the population of the united states then was hardly three times the present population of the city of philadelphia , and yet that was a nation as this is a nation , and the men who spoke for it were setting their hands to a work which was to last , not only that their people might be happy , but that an example might be lifted up for the instruction of the rest of the world .
i like to read the quaint old accounts such as mr. day has read to us this afternoon .
strangers came then to america to see what the young people that had sprung up here were like , and they found men in counsel who knew how to construct governments .
they found men deliberating here who had none of the appearance of novices , none of the hesitation of men who did not know whether the work they were doing was going to last or not ; men who addressed themselves to a problem of construction as familiarly as we attempt to carry out the traditions of a government established these 137 years .
i feel to - day the compulsion of these men , the compulsion of examples which were set up in this place .
and of what do their examples remind us ?
they remind us not merely of public service but of public service shot through with principle and honor .
they were not histrionic men .
they did not say ?
look upon us as upon those who shall hereafter be illustrious .
they said : 
 look upon us who are doing the first free work of constitutional liberty in the world , and who must do it in soberness and truth , or it will not last .
politics , ladies and gentlemen , is made up in just about equal parts of comprehension and sympathy .
no man ought to go into politics who does not comprehend the task that he is going to attack .
he may comprehend it so completely that it daunts him , that he doubts whether his own spirit is stout enough and his own mind able enough to attempt its great undertakings , but unless he comprehend it he ought not to enter it .
after he has comprehended it , there should come into his mind those profound impulses of sympathy which connect him with the rest of mankind , for politics is a business of interpretation , and no men are fit for it who do not see and seek more than their own advantage and interest .
we have stumbled upon many unhappy circumstances in the hundred years that have gone by since the event that we are celebrating .
almost all of them have come from self - centered men , men who saw in their own interest the interest of the country , and who did not have vision enough to read it in wider terms , in the universal terms of equity and justice and the rights of mankind .
i hear a great many people at fourth of july celebrations laud the declaration of independence who in between julys shiver at the plain language of our bills of rights .
the declaration of independence was , indeed , the first audible breath of liberty , but the substance of liberty is written in such documents as the declaration of rights attached , for example , to the first constitution of virginia , which was a model for the similar documents read elsewhere into our great fundamental charters .
that document speaks in very plain terms .
the men of that generation did not hesitate to say that every people has a right to choose its own forms of government?not once , but as often as it pleases?and to accommodate those forms of government to its existing interests and circumstances .
not only to establish but to alter is the fundamental principle of self - government .
we are just as much under compulsion to study the particular circumstances of our own day as the gentlemen were who sat in this hall and set us precedents , not of what to do but of how to do it .
liberty inheres in the circumstances of the day .
human happiness consists in the life which human beings are leading at the time that they live .
i can feed my memory as happily upon the circumstances of the revolutionary and constitutional period as you can , but i can not feed all my purposes with them in washington now .
every day problems arise which wear some new phase and aspect , and i must fall back , if i would serve my conscience , upon those things which are fundamental rather than upon those things which are superficial , and ask myself this question , how are you going to assist in some small part to give the american people and , by example , the peoples of the world more liberty , more happiness , more substantial prosperity ; and how are you going to make that prosperity a common heritage instead of a selfish possession ?
i came here to - day partly in order to feed my own spirit .
i did not come in compliment .
when i was asked to come i knew immediately upon the utterance of the invitation that i had to come , that to be absent would be as if i refused to drink once more at the original fountains of inspiration for our own government .
the men of the day which we now celebrate had a very great advantage over us , ladies and gentlemen , in this one particular : life was simple in america then .
all men shared the same circumstances in almost equal degree .
we think of washington , for example , as an aristocrat , as a man separated by training , separated by family and neighborhood tradition , from the ordinary people of the rank and file of the country .
have you forgotten the personal history of george washington ?
do you not know that he struggled as poor boys now struggle for a meager and imperfect education ; that he worked at his surveyor 's tasks in the lonely forests ; that he knew all the roughness , all the hardships , all the adventure , all the variety of the common life of that day ; and that if he stood a little stiffly in this place , if he looked a little aloof , it was because life had dealt hardly with him ?
all his sinews had been stiffened by the rough work of making america .
he was a man of the people , whose touch had been with them since the day he saw the light first in the old dominion of virginia .
and the men who came after him , men , some of whom had drunk deep at the sources of philosophy and of study , were , nevertheless , also men who on this side of the water knew no complicated life but the simple life of primitive neighborhoods .
our task is very much more difficult .
that sympathy which alone interprets public duty is more difficult for a public man to acquire now than it was then , because we live in the midst of circumstances and conditions infinitely complex .
no man can boast that he understands america .
no man can boast that he has lived the life of america , as almost every man who sat in this hall in those days could boast .
no man can pretend that except by common counsel he can gather into his consciousness what the varied life of this people is .
the duty that we have to keep open eyes and open hearts and accessible understandings is a very much more difficult duty to perform than it was in their day .
yet how much more important that it should be performed , for fear we make infinite and irreparable blunders .
the city of washington is in some respects self - contained , and it is easy there to forget what the rest of the united states is thinking about .
i count it a fortunate circumstance that almost all the windows of the white house and its offices open upon unoccupied spaces that stretch to the banks of the potomac and then out into virginia and on to the heavens themselves , and that as i sit there i can constantly forget washington and remember the united states .
not that i would intimate that all of the united states lies south of washington , but there is a serious thing back of my thought .
if you think too much about being reelected , it is very difficult to be worth reelecting .
you are so apt to forget that the comparatively small number of persons , numerous as they seem to be when they swarm , who come to washington to ask for things , do not constitute an important proportion of the population of the country , that it is constantly necessary to come away from washington and renew one 's contact with the people who do not swarm there , who do not ask for anything , but who do trust you without their personal counsel to do your duty .
unless a man gets these contacts he grows weaker and weaker .
he needs them as hercules needed the touch of mother earth .
if you lift him up too high or he lifts himself too high , he loses the contact and therefore loses the inspiration .
i love to think of those plain men , however far from plain their dress sometimes was , who assembled in this hall .
one is startled to think of the variety of costume and color which would now occur if we were let loose upon the fashions of that age .
men 's lack of taste is largely concealed now by the limitations of fashion .
yet these men , who sometimes dressed like the peacock , were , nevertheless , of the ordinary flight of their time .
they were birds of a feather ; they were birds come from a very simple breeding ; they were much in the open heaven .
they were beginning , when there was so little to distract their attention , to show that they could live upon fundamental principles of government .
we talk those principles , but we have not time to absorb them .
we have not time to let them into our blood , and thence have them translated into the plain mandates of action .
the very smallness of this room , the very simplicity of it all , all the suggestions which come from its restoration , are reassuring things?things which it becomes a man to realize .
therefore my theme here to - day , my only thought , is a very simple one .
do not let us go back to the annals of those sessions of congress to find out what to do , because we live in another age and the circumstances are absolutely different ; but let us be men of that kind ; let us feel at every turn the compulsions of principle and of honor which thy felt ; let us free our vision from temporary circumstances and look abroad at the horizon and take into our lungs the great air of freedom which has blown through this country and stolen across the seas and blessed people everywhere ; and , looking east and west and north and south , let us remind ourselves that we are the custodians , in some degree , of the principles which have made men free and governments just .

my fellow - countrymen : 
 i suppose that every thoughtful man in america has asked himself , during these last troubled weeks , what influence the european war may exert upon the united states , and i take the liberty of addressing a few words to you in order to point out that it is entirely within our own choice what its effects upon us will be and to urge very earnestly upon you the sort of speech and conduct which will best safeguard the nation against distress and disaster .
the effect of the war upon the united states will depend upon what american citizens say and do .
every man who really loves america will act and speak in the true spirit of neutrality , which is the spirit of impartiality and fairness and friendliness to all concerned .
the spirit of the nation in this critical matter will be determined largely by what individuals and society and those gathered in public meetings do and say , upon what newspapers and magazines contain , upon what ministers utter in their pulpits , and men proclaim as their opinions on the street .
the people of the united states are drawn from many nations , and chiefly from the nations now at war .
it is natural and inevitable that there should be the utmost variety of sympathy and desire among them with regard to the issues and circumstances of the conflict .
some will wish one nation , others another , to succeed in the momentous struggle .
it will be easy to excite passion and difficult to allay it .
those responsible for exciting it will assume a heavy responsibility , responsibility for no less a thing than that the people of the united states , whose love of their country and whose loyalty to its government should unite them as americans all , bound in honor and affection to think first of her and her interests , may be divided in camps of hostile opinion , hot against each other , involved in the war itself in impulse and opinion if not in action .
such divisions among us would be fatal to our peace of mind and might seriously stand in the way of the proper performance of our duty as the one great nation at peace , the one people holding itself ready to play a part of impartial mediation and speak the counsels of peace and accommodation , not as a partisan , but as a friend .
i venture , therefore , my fellow countrymen , to speak a solemn word of warning to you against that deepest , most subtle , most essential breach of neutrality which may spring out of partisanship , out of passionately taking sides .
the united states must be neutral in fact as well as in name during these days that are to try men 's souls .
we must be impartial in thought as well as in action , must put a curb upon our sentiments as well as upon every transaction that might be construed as a preference of one party to the struggle before another .
my thought is of america .
i am speaking , i feel sure , the earnest wish and purpose of every thoughtful american that this great country of ours , which is , of course , the first in our thoughts and in our hearts , should show herself in this time of peculiar trial a nation fit beyond others to exhibit the fine poise of undisturbed judgment , the dignity of self - control , the efficiency of dispassionate action ; a nation that neither sits in judgment upon others nor is disturbed in her own counsels and which keeps herself fit and free to do what is honest and disinterested and truly serviceable for the peace of the world .
shall we not resolve to put upon ourselves the restraints which will bring to our people the happiness and the great and lasting influence for peace we covet for them ?

to the house of representatives : 
 it is with unaffected regret that i find myself constrained by clear conviction to return this bill ( h. r. 6060 , " an act to regulate the immigration of aliens to and the residence of aliens in the united states " ) without my signature .
not only do i feel it to be a very serious matter to exercise the power of veto in any case , because it involves opposing the single judgment of the president to the judgment of a majority of both the houses of the congress , a step which no man who realizes his own liability to error can take without great hesitation , but also because this particular bill is in so many important respects admirable , well conceived , and desirable .
its enactment into law would undoubtedly enhance the efficiency and improve the methods of handling the important branch of the public service to which it relates .
but candor and a sense of duty with regard to the responsibility so clearly imposed upon me by the constitution in matters of legislation leave me no choice but to dissent .
in two particulars of vital consequence this bill embodies a radical departure from the traditional and long - established policy of this country , a policy in which our people have conceived the very character of their government to be expressed , the very mission and spirit of the nation in respect of its relations to the peoples of the world outside their borders .
it seeks to all but close entirely the gates of asylum which have always been open to those who could find nowhere else the right and opportunity of constitutional agitation for what they conceived to be the natural and inalienable rights of men ; and it excludes those to whom the opportunities of elementary education have been denied , without regard to their character , their purposes , or their natural capacity .
restrictions like these , adopted earlier in our history as a nation , would very materially have altered the course and cooled the humane ardors of our politics .
the right of political asylum has brought to this country many a man of noble character and elevated purpose who was marked as an outlaw in his own less fortunate land , and who has yet become an ornament to our citizenship and to our public councils .
the children and the compatriots of these illustrious americans must stand amazed to see the representatives of their nation now resolved , in the fullness of our national strength and at the maturity of our great institutions , to risk turning such men back from our shores without test of quality or purpose .
it is difficult for me to believe that the full effect of this feature of the bill was realized when it was framed and adopted , and it is impossible for me to assent to it in the form in which it is here cast .
the literacy test and the tests and restrictions which accompany it constitute an even more radical change in the policy of the nation .
hitherto we have generously kept our doors open to all who were not unfitted by reason of disease or incapacity for self - support or such personal records and antecedents as were likely to make them a menace to our peace and order or to the wholesome and essential relationships of life .
in this bill it is proposed to turn away from tests of character and of quality and impose tests which exclude and restrict ; for the new tests here embodied are not tests of quality or of character or of personal fitness , but tests of opportunity .
those who come seeking opportunity are not to be admitted unless they have already had one of the chief of the opportunities they seek , the opportunity of education .
the object of such provisions is restriction , not selection .
if the people of this country have made up their minds to limit the number of immigrants by arbitrary tests and so reverse the policy of all the generations of americans that have gone before them , it is their right to do so .
i am their servant and have no license to stand in their way .
but i do not believe that they have .
i respectfully submit that no one can quote their mandate to that effect .
has any political party ever avowed a policy of restriction in this fundamental matter , gone to the country on it , and been commissioned to control its legislation ?
does this bill rest upon the conscious and universal assent and desire of the american people ?
i doubt it .
it is because i doubt it that i make bold to dissent from it .
i am willing to abide by the verdict , but not until it has been rendered .
let the platforms of parties speak out upon this policy and the people pronounce their wish .
the matter is too fundamental to be settled otherwise .
i have no pride of opinion in this question .
i am not foolish enough to profess to know the wishes and ideals of america better than the body of her chosen representatives know them .
i only want instruction direct from those whose fortunes , with ours and all men 's , are involved .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 in my report " on the state of the union , " which i had the privilege of reading to you on the 2d of december last , i ventured to reserve for discussion at a later date the subject of additional legislation regarding the very difficult and intricate matter of trusts and monopolies .
the time now seems opportune to turn to that great question ; not only because the currency legislation , which absorbed your attention and the attention of the country in december , is now disposed of , but also because opinion seems to be clearing about us with singular rapidity in this other great field of action .
in the matter of the currency it cleared suddenly and very happily after the much - debated act was passed ; in respect of the monopolies which have multiplied about us and in regard to the various means by which they have been organized and maintained it seems to be coming to a clear and all but universal agreement in anticipation of our action , as if by way of preparation , making the way easier to see and easier to set out upon with confidence and without confusion of counsel .
legislation has its atmosphere like everything else , and the atmosphere of accommodation and mutual understanding which we now breathe with so much refreshment is matter of sincere congratulation .
it ought to make our task very much less difficult and embarrassing than it would have been had we been obliged to continue to act amidst the atmosphere of suspicion and antagonism which has so long made it impossible to approach such questions with dispassionate fairness .
constructive legislation , when successful , is always the embodiment of convincing experience , and of the mature public opinion which finally springs out of that experience .
legislation is a business of interpretation , not of origination ; and it is now plain what the opinion is to which we must give effect in this matter .
it is not recent or hasty opinion .
it springs out of the experience of a whole generation .
it has clarified itself by long contest , and those who for a long time battled with it and sought to change it are now frankly and honorably yielding to it and seeking to conform their actions to it .
the great business men who organized and financed monopoly and those who administered it in actual everyday transactions have year after year , until now , either denied its existence or justified it as necessary for the effective maintenance and development of the vast business processes of the country in the modern circumstances of trade and manufacture and finance ; but all the while opinion has made head against them .
the average business man is convinced that the ways of liberty are also the ways of peace and the ways of success as well ; and at last the masters of business on the great scale have begun to yield their preference and purpose , perhaps their judgment also , in honorable surrender .
what we are purposing to do , therefore , is , happily , not to hamper or interfere with business as enlightened business men prefer to do it , or in any sense to put it under the ban .
the antagonism between business and government is over .
we are now about to give expression to the best business judgment of america , to what we know to be the business conscience and honor of the land .
the government and business men are ready to meet each other half - way in a common effort to square business methods with both public opinion and the law .
the best informed men of the business world condemn the methods and processes and consequences of monopoly as we condemn them ; and the instinctive judgment of the vast majority of business men everywhere goes with them .
we shall now be their spokesmen .
that is the strength of our position and the sure prophecy of what will ensue when our reasonable work is done .
when serious contest ends , when men unite in opinion and purpose , those who are to change their ways of business joining with those who ask for the change , it is possible to effect it in the way in which prudent and thoughtful and patriotic men would wish to see it brought about with as few , as slight , as easy and simple business readjustments as possible in the circumstances , nothing essential disturbed , nothing torn up by the roots , no parts rent asunder which can be left in wholesome combination .
fortunately , no measures of sweeping or novel change are necessary .
it will be understood that our object is not to unsettle business or anywhere seriously to break its established courses athwart .
on the contrary , we desire the laws we are now about to pass to be the bulwarks and safeguards of industry against the forces that have disturbed it .
what we have to do can be done in a new spirit , in thoughtful moderation , without revolution of any untoward kind .
we are all agreed that " private monopoly is indefensible and intolerable , " and our program is founded upon that conviction .
it will be a comprehensive but not a radical or unacceptable program and these are its items , the changes which opinion deliberately sanctions and for which business waits : 
 it waits with acquiescence , in the first place , for laws which will effectually prohibit and prevent such interlockings of the personnel of the directorates of great corporations?banks and railroads , industrial , commercial , and public service bodies?as in effect result in making those who borrow and those who lend practically one and the same , those who sell and those who buy but the same persons trading with one another under different names and in different combinations , and those who affect to compete in fact partners and masters of some whole field of business .
sufficient time should be allowed , of course , in which to effect these changes of organization without inconvenience or confusion .
such a prohibition will work much more than a mere negative good by correcting the serious evils which have arisen because , for example , the men who have been the directing spirits of the great investment banks have usurped the place which belongs to independent industrial management working in its own behoof .
it will bring new men , new energies , a new spirit of initiative , new blood , into the management of our great business enterprises .
it will open the field of industrial development and origination to scores of men who have been obliged to serve when their abilities entitled them to direct .
it will immensely hearten the young men coming on and will greatly enrich the business activities of the whole country .
in the second place , business men as well as those who direct public affairs now recognize , and recognize with painful clearness , the great harm and injustice which has been done to many , if not all , of the great railroad systems of the country by the way in which they have been financed and their own distinctive interests subordinated to the interests of the men who financed them and of other business enterprises which those men wished to promote .
the country is ready , therefore , to accept , and accept with relief as well as approval , a law which will confer upon the interstate commerce commission the power to superintend and regulate the financial operations by which the railroads are henceforth to be supplied with the money they need for their proper development to meet the rapidly growing requirements of the country for increased and improved facilities of transportation .
we can not postpone action in this matter without leaving the railroads exposed to many serious handicaps and hazards ; and the prosperity of the railroads and the prosperity of the country are inseparably connected .
upon this question those who are chiefly responsible for the actual management and operation of the railroads have spoken very plainly and very earnestly , with a purpose we ought to be quick to accept .
it will be one step , and a very important one , toward the necessary separation of the business of production from the business of transportation .
the business of the country awaits also , has long awaited and has suffered because it could not obtain , further and more explicit legislative definition of the policy and meaning of the existing antitrust law .
nothing hampers business like uncertainty .
nothing daunts or discourages it like the necessity to take chances , to run the risk of falling under the condemnation of the law before it can make sure just what the law is .
surely we are sufficiently familiar with the actual processes and methods of monopoly and of the many hurtful restraints of trade to make definition possible , at any rate up to the limits of what experience has disclosed .
these practices , being now abundantly disclosed , can be explicitly and item by item forbidden by statute in such terms as will practically eliminate uncertainty , the law itself and the penalty being made equally plain .
and the business men of the country desire something more than that the menace of legal process in these matters be made explicit and intelligible .
they desire the advice , the definite guidance and information which can be supplied by an administrative body , an interstate trade commission .
the opinion of the country would instantly approve of such a commission .
it would not wish to see it empowered to make terms with monopoly or in any sort to assume control of business , as if the government made itself responsible .
it demands such a commission only as an indispensable instrument of information and publicity , as a clearing house for the facts by which both the public mind and the managers of great business undertakings should be guided , and as an instrumentality for doing justice to business where the processes of the courts or the natural forces of correction outside the courts are inadequate to adjust the remedy to the wrong in a way that will meet all the equities and circumstances of the case .
producing industries , for example , which have passed the point up to which combination may be consistent with the public interest and the freedom of trade , can not always be dissected into their component units as readily as railroad companies or similar organizations can be .
their dissolution by ordinary legal process may oftentimes involve financial consequences likely to overwhelm the security market and bring upon it breakdown and confusion .
there ought to be an administrative commission capable of directing and shaping such corrective processes , not only in aid of the courts but also by independent suggestion , if necessary .
inasmuch as our object and the spirit of our action in these matters is to meet business half - way in its processes of self - correction and disturb its legitimate course as little as possible , we ought to see to it , and the judgment of practical and sagacious men of affairs everywhere would applaud us if we did see to it , that penalties and punishments should fall , not upon business itself , to its confusion and interruption , but upon the individuals who use the instrumentalities of business to do things which public policy and sound business practice condemn .
every act of business is done at the command or upon the initiative of some ascertainable person or group of persons .
these should be held individually responsible and the punishment should fall upon them , not upon the business organization of which they make illegal use .
it should be one of the main objects of our legislation to divest such persons of their corporate cloak and deal with them as with those who do not represent their corporations , but merely by deliberate intention break the law .
business men the country through would , i am sure , applaud us if we were to take effectual steps to see that the officers and directors of great business bodies were prevented from bringing them and the business of the country into disrepute and danger .
other questions remain which will need very thoughtful and practical treatment .
enterprises , in these modern days of great individual fortunes , are oftentimes interlocked , not by being under the control of the same directors , but by the fact that the greater part of their corporate stock is owned by a single person or group of persons who are in some way ultimately related in interest .
we are agreed , i take it , that holding companies should be prohibited , but what of the controlling private ownership of individuals or actually cooperative groups of individuals ?
shall the private owners of capital stock be suffered to be themselves in effect holding companies ?
we do not wish , i suppose , to forbid the purchase of stocks by any person who pleases to buy them in such quantities as he can afford , or in any way arbitrarily to limit the sale of stocks to bona fide purchasers .
shall we require the owners of stock , when their voting power in several companies which ought to be independent of one another would constitute actual control , to make election in which of them they will exercise their right to vote ?
this question i venture for your consideration .
there is another matter in which imperative considerations of justice and fair play suggest thoughtful remedial action .
not only do many of the combinations effected or sought to be effected in the industrial world work an injustice upon the public in general ; they also directly and seriously injure the individuals who are put out of business in one unfair way or another by the many dislodging and exterminating forces of combination .
i hope that we shall agree in giving private individuals who claim to have been injured by these processes the right to found their suits for redress upon the facts and judgments proved and entered in suits by the government where the government has upon its own initiative sued the combinations complained of and won its suit , and that the statute of limitations shall be suffered to run against such litigants only from the date of the conclusion of the government 's action .
it is not fair that the private litigant should be obliged to set up and establish again the facts which the government has proved .
he can not afford , he has not the power , to make use of such processes of inquiry as the government has command of .
thus shall individual justice be done while the processes of business are rectified and squared with the general conscience .
i have laid the case before you , no doubt as it lies in your own mind , as it lies in the thought of the country .
what must every candid man say of the suggestions i have laid before you , of the plain obligations of which i have reminded you ?
that these are new things for which the country is not prepared ?
no ; but that they are old things , now familiar , and must of course be undertaken if we are to square our laws with the thought and desire of the country .
until these things are done , conscientious business men the country over will be unsatisfied .
they are in these things our mentors and colleagues .
we are now about to write the additional articles of our constitution of peace , the peace that is honor and freedom and prosperity .

mr. president , gentlemen of the american bar association : 
 i am very deeply gratified by the greeting that your president has given me and by your response to it .
my only strength lies in your confidence .
we stand now in a peculiar case .
our first thought , i suppose , as lawyers , is of international law , of those bonds of right and principle which draw the nations together and hold the community of the world to some standards of action .
we know that we see in international law , as it were , the moral processes by which law itself came into existence .
i know that as a lawyer i have myself at times felt that there was no real comparison between the law of a nation and the law of nations , because the latter lacked the sanction that gave the former strength and validity .
and yet , if you look into the matter more closely , you will find that the two have the same foundations , and that those foundations are more evident and conspicuous in our day than they have ever been before .
the opinion of the world is the mistress of the world ; and the processes of international law are the slow processes by which opinion works its will .
what impresses me is the constant thought that that is the tribunal at the bar of which we all sit .
i would call your attention , incidentally , to the circumstance that it does not observe the ordinary rules of evidence ; which has sometimes suggested to me that the ordinary rules of evidence had shown some signs of growing antique .
everything , rumor included , is heard in this court , and the standard of judgment is not so much the character of the testimony as the character of the witness .
the motives are disclosed , the purposes are conjectured , and that opinion is finally accepted which seems to be , not the best founded in law , perhaps , but the best founded in integrity of character and of morals .
that is the process which is slowly working its will upon the world ; and what we should be watchful of is not so much jealous interests as sound principles of action .
the disinterested course is always the biggest course to pursue not only , but it is in the long run the most profitable course to pursue .
if you can establish your character , you can establish your credit .
what i wanted to suggest to this association , in bidding them very hearty welcome to the city , is whether we sufficiently apply these same ideas to the body of municipal law which we seek to administer .
citations seem to play so much larger a role now than principle .
there was a time when the thoughtful eye of the judge rested upon the changes of social circumstances and almost palpably saw the law arise out of human life .
have we got to a time when the only way to change law is by statute ?
the changing of law by statute seems to me like mending a garment with a patch , whereas law should grow by the life that is in it , not by the life that is outside of it .
i once said to a lawyer with whom i was discussing some question of precedent , and in whose presence i was venturing to doubt the rational validity , at any rate , of the particular precedents he cited , " after all , is n't our object justice ? "
and he said , " god forbid !
we should be very much confused if we made that our standard .
our standard is to find out what the rule has been and how the rule that has been applies to the case that is . "
i should hate to think that the law was based entirely upon " has beens . "
i should hate to think that the law did not derive its impulse from looking forward rather than from looking backward , or , rather , that it did not derive its instruction from looking about and seeing what the circumstances of man actually are and what the impulses of justice necessarily are .
understand me , gentlemen , i am not venturing in this presence to impeach the law .
for the present , by the force of circumstances , i am in part the embodiment of the law , and it would be very awkward to disavow myself .
but i do wish to make this intimation , that in this time of world change , in this time when we are going to find out just how , in what particulars , and to what extent the real facts of human life and the real moral judgments of mankind prevail , it is worth while looking inside our municipal law and seeing whether the judgments of the law are made square with the moral judgments of mankind .
for i believe that we are custodians , not of commands , but of a spirit .
we are custodians of the spirit of righteousness , of the spirit of equal - handed justice , of the spirit of hope which believes in the perfectibility of the law with the perfectibility of human life itself .
public life , like private life , would be very dull and dry if it were not for this belief in the essential beauty of the human spirit and the belief that the human spirit could be translated into action and into ordinance .
not entire .
you can not go any faster than you can advance the average moral judgments of the mass , but you can go at least as fast as that , and you can see to it that you do not lag behind the average moral judgments of the mass .
i have in my life dealt with all sorts and conditions of men , and i have found that the flame of moral judgment burned just as bright in the man of humble life and limited experience as in the scholar and the man of affairs .
and i would like his voice always to be heard , not as a witness , not as speaking in his own case , but as if he were the voice of men in general , in our courts of justice , as well as the voice of the lawyers , remembering what the law has been .
my hope is that , being stirred to the depths by the extraordinary circumstances of the time in which we live , we may recover from those depths something of a renewal of that vision of the law with which men may be supposed to have started out in the old days of the oracles , who communed with the intimations of divinity .

my fellow - countrymen : 
 the entrance of our own beloved country into the grim and terrible war for democracy and human rights which has shaken the world creates so many problems of national life and action which call for immediate consideration and settlement that i hope you will permit me to address to you a few words of earnest counsel and appeal with regard to them .
we are rapidly putting our navy upon an effective war footing and are about to create and equip a great army , but these are the simplest parts of the great task to which we have addressed ourselves .
there is not a single selfish element , so far as i can see , in the cause we are fighting for .
we are fighting for what we believe and wish to be the rights of mankind and for the future peace and security of the world .
to do this great thing worthily and successfully we must devote ourselves to the service without regard to profit or material advantage and with an energy and intelligence that will rise to the level of the enterprise itself .
we must realize to the full how great the task is and how many things , how many kinds and elements of capacity and service and self - sacrifice , it involves .
these , then , are the things we must do , and do well , besides fighting , the things without which mere fighting would be fruitless : 
 we must supply abundant food for ourselves and for our armies and our seamen not only , but also for a large part of the nations with whom we have now made common cause , in whose support and by whose sides we shall be fighting .
we must supply ships by the hundreds out of our shipyards to carry to the other side of the sea , submarines or no submarines , what will every day be needed there , and abundant materials out of our fields and our mines and our factories with which not only to clothe and equip our own forces on land and sea but also to clothe and support our people for whom the gallant fellows under arms can no longer work , to help clothe and equip the armies with which we are coordinating in europe , and to keep the looms and manufactories there in raw material ; coal to keep the fires going in ships at sea and in the furnaces of hundreds of factories across the sea ; steel out of which to make arms and ammunition both here and there ; rails for worn - out railways back of the fighting fronts ; locomotives and rolling stock to take the place of those every day going to pieces ; mules , horses , cattle for labor and for military service ; everything with which the people of england and france and italy and russia have usually supplied themselves but can not now afford the men , the materials , or the machinery to make .
it is evident to every thinking man that our industries , on the farms , in the shipyards , in the mines , in the factories , must be made more prolific and more efficient than ever and that they must be more economically managed and better adapted to the particular requirements of our task than they have been ; and what i want to say is that the men and the women who devote their thought and their energy to these things will be serving the country and conducting the fight for peace and freedom just as truly and just as effectively as the men on the battlefield or in the trenches .
the industrial forces of the country , men and women alike , will be a great national , a great international , service army , a notable and honored host engaged in the service of the nation and the world , the efficient friends and saviors of free men everywhere .
thousands , nay , hundreds of thousands , of men otherwise liable to military service will of right and of necessity be excused from that service and assigned to the fundamental , sustaining work of the fields and factories and mines , and they will be as much part of the great patriotic forces of the nation as the men under fire .
i take the liberty , therefore , of addressing this word to the farmers of the country and to all who work on the farms : the supreme need of our own nation and of the nations with which we are coordinating is an abundance of supplies , and especially of food - stuffs .
the importance of an adequate food supply , especially for the present year , is superlative .
without abundant food , alike for the armies and the peoples now at war , the whole great enterprise upon which we have embarked will break down and fail .
the world 's food reserves are low .
not only during the present emergency but for some time after peace shall have come both our own people and a large proportion of the people of europe must rely upon the harvests in america .
upon the farmers of this country , therefore , in large measure , rests the fate of the war and the fate of the nations .
may the nation not count upon them to omit no step that will increase the production of their land or that will bring about the most effectual coordination in the sale and distribution of their products ?
the time is short .
it is of the most imperative importance that everything possible be done and done immediately to make sure of large harvests .
i call upon young men and old alike and upon the able - bodied boys of the land to accept and act upon this duty to turn in hosts to the farms and make certain that no pains and no labor is lacking in this great matter .
i particularly appeal to the farmers of the south to plant abundant food - stuffs as well as cotton .
they can show their patriotism in no better or more convincing way than by resisting the great temptation of the present price of cotton and helping , helping upon a great scale , to feed the nation and the peoples everywhere who are fighting for their liberties and for our own .
the variety of their crops will be the visible measure of their comprehension of their national duty .
the government of the united states and the governments of the several states stand ready to coordinate .
they will do everything possible to assist farmers in securing an adequate supply of seed , an adequate force of laborers when they are most needed , at harvest time , and the means of expediting shipments of fertilizers and farm machinery , as well as of the crops themselves when harvested .
the course of trade shall be as unhampered as it is possible to make it and there shall be no unwarranted manipulation of the nation 's food supply by those who handle it on its way to the consumer .
this is our opportunity to demonstrate the efficiency of a great democracy and we shall not fall short of it !
this let me say to the middlemen of every sort , whether they are handling our food - stuffs or our raw materials of manufacture or the products of our mills and factories : the eyes of the country will be especially upon you .
this is your opportunity for signal service , efficient and disinterested .
the country expects you , as it expects all others , to forego unusual profits , to organize and expedite shipments of supplies of every kind , but especially of food , with an eye to the service you are rendering and in the spirit of those who enlist in the ranks , for their people , not for themselves .
i shall confidently expect you to deserve and win the confidence of people of every sort and station .
to the men who run the railways of the country , whether they be managers or operative employees , let me say that the railways are the arteries of the nation 's life and that upon them rests the immense responsibility of seeing to it that those arteries suffer no obstruction of any kind , no inefficiency or slackened power .
to the merchant let me suggest the motto , " small profits and quick service " ; and to the shipbuilder the thought that the life of the war depends upon him .
the food and the war supplies must be carried across the seas no matter how many ships are sent to the bottom .
the places of those that go down must be supplied and supplied at once .
to the miner let me say that he stands where the farmer does : the work of the world waits on him .
if he slackens or fails , armies and statesmen are helpless .
he also is enlisted in the great service army .
the manufacturer does not need to be told , i hope , that the nation looks to him to speed and perfect every process ; and i want only to remind his employees that their service is absolutely indispensable and is counted on by every man who loves the country and its liberties .
let me suggest , also , that everyone who creates or cultivates a garden helps , and helps greatly , to solve the problem of the feeding of the nations ; and that every housewife who practices strict economy puts herself in the ranks of those who serve the nation .
this is the time for america to correct her unpardonable fault of wastefulness and extravagance .
let every man and every woman assume the duty of careful , provident use and expenditure as a public duty , as a dictate of patriotism which no one can now expect ever to be excused or forgiven for ignoring .
in the hope that this statement of the needs of the nation and of the world in this hour of supreme crisis may stimulate those to whom it comes and remind all who need reminder of the solemn duties of a time such as the world has never seen before , i beg that all editors and publishers everywhere will give as prominent publication and as wide circulation as possible to this appeal .
i venture to suggest , also , to all advertising agencies that they would perhaps render a very substantial and timely service to the country if they would give it widespread repetition .
and i hope that clergymen will not think the theme of it an unworthy or inappropriate subject of comment and homily from their pulpits .
the supreme test of the nation has come .
we must all speak , act , and serve together !

mr. chairman and fellow - citizens : 
 we are assembled to celebrate the one hundred and thirty - eighth anniversary of the birth of the united states .
i suppose that we can more vividly realize the circumstances of that birth standing on this historic spot than it would be possible to realize them anywhere else .
the declaration of independence was written in philadelphia ; it was adopted in this historic building by which we stand .
i have just had the privilege of sitting in the chair of the great man who presided over the deliberations of those who gave the declaration to the world .
my hand rests at this moment upon the table upon which the declaration was signed .
we can feel that we are almost in the visible and tangible presence of a great historic transaction .
have you ever read the declaration of independence or attended with close comprehension to the real character of it when you have heard it read ?
if you have , you will know that it is not a fourth of july oration .
the declaration of independence was a document preliminary to war .
it was a vital piece of practical business , not a piece of rhetoric ; and if you will pass beyond those preliminary passages which we are accustomed to quote about the rights of men and read into the heart of the document you will see that it is very express and detailed , that it consists of a series of definite specifications concerning actual public business of the day .
not the business of our day , for the matter with which it deals is past , but the business of that first revolution by which the nation was set up , the business of 1776 .
its general statements , its general declarations can not mean anything to us unless we append to it a similar specific body of particulars as to what we consider the essential business of our own day .
liberty does not consist , my fellow - citizens , in mere general declarations of the rights of man .
it consists in the translation of those declarations into definite action .
therefore , standing here where the declaration was adopted , reading its businesslike sentences , we ought to ask ourselves what there is in it for us .
there is nothing in it for us unless we can translate it into the terms of our own conditions and of our own lives .
we must reduce it to what the lawyers call a bill of particulars .
it contains a bill of particulars , but the bill of particulars of 1776 .
if we would keep it alive , we must fill it with a bill of particulars of the year 1914 .
the task to which we have constantly to readdress ourselves is the task of proving that we are worthy of the men who drew this great declaration and know what they would have done in our circumstances .
patriotism consists in some very practical things -- practical in that they belong to the life of every day , that they wear no extraordinary distinction about them , that they are connected with commonplace duty .
the way to be patriotic in america is not only to love america but to love the duty that lies nearest to our hand and know that in performing it we are serving our country .
there are some gentlemen in washington , for example , at this very moment who are showing themselves very patriotic in a way which does not attract wide attention but seems to belong to mere everyday obligations .
the members of the house and senate who stay in hot washington to maintain a quorum of the houses and transact the all - important business of the nation are doing an act of patriotism .
i honor them for it , and i am glad to stay there and stick by them until the work is done .
it is patriotic , also , to learn what the facts of our national life are and to face them with candor .
i have heard a great many facts stated about the present business condition of this country , for example -- a great many allegations of fact , at any rate , but the allegations do not tally with one another .
and yet i know that truth always matches with truth and when i find some insisting that everything is going wrong and others insisting that everything is going right , and when i know from a wide observation of the general circumstances of the country taken as a whole that things are going extremely well , i wonder what those who are crying out that things are wrong are trying to do .
are they trying to serve the country , or are they trying to serve something smaller than the country ?
are they trying to put hope into the hearts of the men who work and toil every day , or are they trying to plant discouragement and despair in those hearts ?
and why do they cry that everything is wrong and yet do nothing to set it right ?
if they love america and anything is wrong amongst us , it is their business to put their hand with ours to the task of setting it right .
when the facts are known and acknowledged , the duty of all patriotic men is to accept them in candor and to address themselves hopefully and confidently to the common counsel which is necessary to act upon them wisely and in universal concert .
i have had some experiences in the last fourteen months which have not been entirely reassuring .
it was universally admitted , for example , my fellow - citizens , that the banking system of this country needed reorganization .
we set the best minds that we could find to the task of discovering the best method of reorganization .
but we met with hardly anything but criticism from the bankers of the country ; we met with hardly anything but resistance from the majority of those at least who spoke at all concerning the matter .
and yet so soon as that act was passed there was a universal chorus of applause , and the very men who had opposed the measure joined in that applause .
if it was wrong the day before it was passed , why was it right the day after it was passed ?
where had been the candor of criticism not only , but the concert of counsel which makes legislative action vigorous and safe and successful ?
it is not patriotic to concert measures against one another ; it is patriotic to concert measures for one another .
in one sense the declaration of independence has lost its significance .
it has lost its significance as a declaration of national independence .
nobody outside of america believed when it was uttered that we could make good our independence ; now nobody anywhere would dare to doubt that we are independent and can maintain our independence .
as a declaration of independence , therefore , it is a mere historic document .
our independence is a fact so stupendous that it can be measured only by the size and energy and variety and wealth and power of one of the greatest nations in the world .
but it is one thing to be independent and it is another thing to know what to do with your independence .
it is one thing to come to your majority and another thing to know what you are going to do with your life and your energies ; and one of the most serious questions for sober - minded men to address themselves to in the united states is this : what are we going to do with the influence and power of this great nation ?
are we going to play the old role of using that power for our aggrandizement and material benefit only ?
you know what that may mean .
it may upon occasion mean that we shall use it to make the peoples of other nations suffer in the way in which we said it was intolerable to suffer when we uttered our declaration of independence .
the department of state at washington is constantly called upon to back up the commercial enterprises and the industrial enterprises of the united states in foreign countries , and it at one time went so far in that direction that all its diplomacy came to be designated as " dollar diplomacy . "
it was called upon to support every man who wanted to earn anything anywhere if he was an american .
but there ought to be a limit to that .
there is no man who is more interested than i am in carrying the enterprise of american business men to every quarter of the globe .
i was interested in it long before i was suspected of being a politician .
i have been preaching it year after year as the great thing that lay in the future for the united states , to show her wit and skill and enterprise and influence in every country in the world .
but observe the limit to all that which is laid upon us perhaps more than upon any other nation in the world .
we set this nation up , at any rate we professed to set it up , to vindicate the rights of men .
we did not name any differences between one race and another .
we did not set up any barriers against any particular people .
we opened our gates to all the world and said , " let all men who wish to be free come to us and they will be welcome . "
we said , " this independence of ours is not a selfish thing for our own exclusive private use .
it is for everybody to whom we can find the means of extending it . "
we can not with that oath taken in our youth , we can not with that great ideal set before us when we were a young people and numbered only a scant 3,000,000 , take upon ourselves , now that we are 100,000,000 strong , any other conception of duty than we then entertained .
if american enterprise in foreign countries , particularly in those foreign countries which are not strong enough to resist us , takes the shape of imposing upon and exploiting the mass of the people of that country it ought to be checked and not encouraged .
i am willing to get anything for an american that money and enterprise can obtain except the suppression of the rights of other men .
i will not help any man buy a power which he ought not to exercise over his fellow - beings .
you know , my fellow - countrymen , what a big question there is in mexico .
eighty - five per cent of the mexican people have never been allowed to have any genuine participation in their own government or to exercise any substantial rights with regard to the very land they live upon .
all the rights that men most desire have been exercised by the other fifteen per cent .
do you suppose that that circumstance is not sometimes in my thought ?
i know that the american people have a heart that will beat just as strong for those millions in mexico as it will beat , or has beaten , for any other millions elsewhere in the world , and that when once they conceive what is at stake in mexico they will know what ought to be done in mexico .
i hear a great deal said about the loss of property in mexico and the loss of the lives of foreigners , and i deplore these things with all my heart .
undoubtedly , upon the conclusion of the present disturbed conditions in mexico those who have been unjustly deprived of their property or in any wise unjustly put upon ought to be compensated .
men 's individual rights have no doubt been invaded , and the invasion of those rights has been attended by many deplorable circumstances which ought sometime , in the proper way , to be accounted for .
but back of it all is the struggle of a people to come into its own , and while we look upon the incidents in the foreground let us not forget the great tragic reality in the background which towers above the whole picture .
a patriotic american is a man who is not niggardly and selfish in the things that he enjoys that make for human liberty and the rights of man .
he wants to share them with the whole world , and he is never so proud of the great flag under which he lives as when it comes to mean to other people as well as to himself a symbol of hope and liberty .
i would be ashamed of this flag if it ever did anything outside america that we would not permit it to do inside of america .
the world is becoming more complicated every day , my fellow - citizens .
no man ought to be foolish enough to think that he understands it all .
and , therefore , i am glad that there are some simple things in the world .
one of the simple things is principle .
honesty is a perfectly simple thing .
it is hard for me to believe that in most circumstances when a man has a choice of ways he does not know which is the right way and which is the wrong way .
no man who has chosen the wrong way ought even to come into independence square ; it is holy ground which he ought not to tread upon .
he ought not to come where immortal voices have uttered the great sentences of such a document as this declaration of independence upon which rests the liberty of a whole nation .
and so i say that it is patriotic sometimes to prefer the honor of the country to its material interest .
would you rather be deemed by all the nations of the world incapable of keeping your treaty obligations in order that you might have free tolls for american ships ?
the treaty under which we gave up that right may have been a mistaken treaty , but there was no mistake about its meaning .
when i have made a promise as a man i try to keep it , and i know of no other rule permissible to a nation .
the most distinguished nation in the world is the nation that can and will keep its promises even to its own hurt .
and i want to say parenthetically that i do not think anybody was hurt .
i can not be enthusiastic for subsidies to a monopoly , but let those who are enthusiastic for subsidies ask themselves whether they prefer subsidies to unsullied honor .
the most patriotic man , ladies and gentlemen , is sometimes the man who goes in the direction that he thinks right even when he sees half the world against him .
it is the dictate of patriotism to sacrifice yourself if you think that that is the path of honor and of duty .
do not blame others if they do not agree with you .
do not die with bitterness in your heart because you did not convince the rest of the world , but die happy because you believe that you tried to serve your country by not selling your soul .
those were grim days , the days of 1776 .
those gentlemen did not attach their names to the declaration of independence on this table expecting a holiday on the next day , and that 4th of july was not itself a holiday .
they attached their signatures to that significant document knowing that if they failed it was certain that every one of them would hang for the failure .
they were committing treason in the interest of the liberty of 3,000,000 people in america .
all the rest of the world was against them and smiled with cynical incredulity at the audacious undertaking .
do you think that if they could see this great nation now they would regret anything that they then did to draw the gaze of a hostile world upon them ?
every idea must be started by somebody , and it is a lonely thing to start anything .
yet if it is in you , you must start it if you have a man 's blood in you and if you love the country that you profess to be working for .
i am sometimes very much interested when i see gentlemen supposing that popularity is the way to success in america .
the way to success in this great country , with its fair judgments , is to show that you are not afraid of anybody except god and his final verdict .
if i did not believe that , i would not believe in democracy .
if i did not believe that , i would not believe that people can govern themselves .
if i did not believe that the moral judgment would be the last judgment , the final judgment , in the minds of men as well as the tribunal of god , i could not believe in popular government .
but i do believe these things , and , therefore , i earnestly believe in the democracy not only of america but of every awakened people that wishes and intends to govern and control its own affairs .
it is very inspiring , my friends , to come to this that may be called the original fountain of independence and liberty in american and here drink draughts of patriotic feeling which seem to renew the very blood in one 's veins .
down in washington sometimes when the days are hot and the business presses intolerably and there are so many things to do that it does not seem possible to do anything in the way it ought to be done , it is always possible to lift one 's thought above the task of the moment and , as it were , to realize that great thing of which we are all parts , the great body of american feeling and american principle .
no man could do the work that has to be done in washington if he allowed himself to be separated from that body of principle .
he must make himself feel that he is a part of the people of the united states , that he is trying to think not only for them , but with them , and then he can not feel lonely .
he not only can not feel lonely but he can not feel afraid of anything .
my dream is that as the years go on and the world knows more and more of america it will also drink at these fountains of youth and renewal ; that it also will turn to america for those moral inspirations which lie at the basis of all freedom ; that the world will never fear america unless it feels that it is engaged in some enterprise which is inconsistent with the rights of humanity ; and that america will come into the full light of the day when all shall know that she puts human rights above all other rights and that her flag is the flag not only of america but of humanity .
what other great people has devoted itself to this exalted ideal ?
to what other nation in the world can all eyes look for an instant sympathy that thrills the whole body politic when men anywhere are fighting for their rights ?
i do not know that there will ever be a declaration of independence and of grievances for mankind , but i believe that if any such document is ever drawn it will be drawn in the spirit of the american declaration of independence , and that america has lifted high the light which will shine unto all generations and guide the feet of mankind to the goal of justice and liberty and peace .

whereas the congress of the united states in the exercise of the constitutional authority vested in them have resolved , by joint resolution of the senate and house of representatives bearing date this day " that the state of war between the united states and the imperial german government which has been thrust upon the united states is hereby formally declared " ; 
 whereas it is provided by section 4067 of the revised statutes , as follows : 
 whenever there is declared a war between the united states and any foreign nation or government , or any invasion or predatory incursion is perpetrated , attempted , or threatened against the territory of the united states , by any foreign nation or government , and the president makes public proclamation of the event , all natives , citizens , denizens , or subjects of a hostile nation or government , being males of the age of fourteen years and upwards , who shall be within the united states , and not actually naturalized , shall be liable to be apprehended , restrained , secured , and removed as alien enemies .
the president is authorized , in any such event , by his proclamation thereof , or other public act , to direct the conduct to be observed , on the part of the united states , toward the aliens who become so liable ; the manner and degree of the restraint to which they shall be subject , and in what cases , and upon what security their residence shall be permitted , and to provide for the removal of those who , not being permitted to reside within the united states , refuse or neglect to depart therefrom ; and to establish any such regulations which are found necessary in the premises and for the public safety ; 
 whereas , by sections 4068 , 4069 , and 4070 of the revised statutes , further provision is made relative to alien enemies ; 
 now , therefore , i , woodrow wilson , president of the united states of america , do hereby proclaim to all whom it may concern that a state of war exists between the united states and the imperial german government ; and i do specially direct all officers , civil or military , of the united states that they exercise vigilance and zeal in the discharge of the duties incident to such a state of war ; and i do , moreover , earnestly appeal to all american citizens that they , in loyal devotion to their country , dedicated from its foundation to the principles of liberty and justice , uphold the laws of the land , and give undivided and willing support to those measures which may be adopted by the constitutional authorities in prosecuting the war to a successful issue and in obtaining a secure and just peace ; 
 and , acting under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by the constitution of the united states and the said sections of the revised statutes , i do hereby further proclaim and direct that the conduct to be observed on the part of the united states toward all natives , citizens , denizens , or subjects of germany , being males of the age of fourteen years and upwards , who shall be within the united states and not actually naturalized , who for the purpose of this proclamation and under such sections of the revised statutes are termed alien enemies , shall be as follows : 
 all alien enemies are enjoined to preserve the peace towards the united states and to refrain from crime against the public safety , and from violating the laws of the united states and of the states and territories thereof , and to refrain from actual hostility or giving information , aid or comfort to the enemies of the united states , and to comply strictly with the regulations which are hereby or which may be from time to time promulgated by the president ; and so long as they shall conduct themselves in accordance with law , they shall be undisturbed in the peaceful pursuit of their lives and occupations and be accorded the consideration due to all peaceful and law - abiding persons , except so far as restrictions may be necessary for their own protection and for the safety of the united states ; and towards such alien enemies as conduct themselves in accordance with law , all citizens of the united states are enjoined to preserve the peace and to treat them with all such friendliness as may be compatible with loyalty and allegiance to the united states .
and all alien enemies who fail to conduct themselves as so enjoined , in addition to all other penalties prescribed by law , shall be liable to restraint , or to give security , or to remove and depart from the united states in the manner prescribed by sections 4069 and 4070 of the revised statutes , and as prescribed in the regulations duly promulgated by the president ; 
 and pursuant to the authority vested in me , i hereby declare and establish the following regulations , which i find necessary in the premises and for the public safety : 
 first .
an alien enemy shall not have in his possession , at any time or place , any fire - arm , weapon or implement of war , or component part thereof , ammunition , maxim or other silencer , bomb or explosive or material used in the manufacture of explosives ; 
 second .
an alien enemy shall not have in his possession at any time or place , or use or operate any aircraft or wireless apparatus , or any form of signalling device , or any form of cipher code , or any paper , document or book written or printed in cipher or in which there may be invisible writing ; 
 third .
all property found in the possession of an alien enemy in violation of the foregoing regulations shall be subject to seizure by the united states ; 
 fourth .
an alien enemy shall not approach or be found within one - half of a mile of any federal or state fort , camp , arsenal , aircraft station , government or naval vessel , navy yard , factory , or workshop for the manufacture of munitions of war or of any products for the use of the army or navy ; 
 fifth .
an alien enemy shall not write , print , or publish any attack or threats against the government or congress of the united states , or either branch thereof , or against the measures or policy of the united states , or against the person or property of any person in the military , naval or civil service of the united states , or of the states or territories , or of the district of columbia , or of the municipal governments therein ; 
 sixth .
an alien enemy shall not commit or abet any hostile acts against the united states , or give information , aid , or comfort to its enemies ; 
 seventh .
an alien enemy shall not reside in or continue to reside in , to remain in , or enter any locality which the president may from time to time designate by executive order as a prohibited area in which residence by an alien enemy shall be found by him to constitute a danger to the public peace and safety of the united states , except by permit from the president and except under such limitations or restrictions as the president may prescribe ; 
 eighth .
an alien enemy whom the president shall have reasonable cause to believe to be aiding or about to aid the enemy , or to be at large to the danger of the public peace or safety of the united states , or to have violated or to be about to violate any of these regulations , shall remove to any location designated by the president by executive order , and shall not remove therefrom without a permit , or shall depart from the united states if so required by the president ; 
 ninth .
no alien enemy shall depart from the united states until he shall have received such permit as the president shall prescribe , or except under order of a court , judge , or justice , under sections 4069 and 4070 of the revised statutes ; 
 tenth .
no alien enemy shall land in or enter the united states , except under such restrictions and at such places as the president may prescribe ; 
 eleventh .
if necessary to prevent violation of the regulations , all alien enemies will be obliged to register ; 
 twelfth .
an alien enemy whom there may be reasonable cause to believe to be aiding or about to aid the enemy , or who may be at large to the danger of the public peace or safety , or who violates or attempts to violate , or of whom there is reasonable ground to believe that he is about to violate , any regulation duly promulgated by the president , or any criminal law of the united states , or of the states or territories thereof , will be subject to summary arrest by the united states marshal , or his deputy , or such other officer as the president shall designate , and to confinement in such penitentiary , prison , jail , military camp , or other place of detention as may be directed by the president .
this proclamation and the regulations herein contained shall extend and apply to all land and water , continental or insular , in any way within the jurisdiction of the united states .
in witness whereof , i have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the united states to be affixed .
done at the city of washington this 6th day of april in the year of our lord one thousand nine hundred and seventeen and of the independence of the united states of america the one hundred and forty - first .

the session upon which you are now entering will be the closing session of the sixty - third congress , a congress , i venture to say , which will long be remembered for the great body of thoughtful and constructive work which it has done , in loyal response to the thought and needs of the country .
i should like in this address to review the notable record and try to make adequate assessment of it ; but no doubt we stand too near the work that has been done and are ourselves too much part of it to play the part of historians toward it .
our program of legislation with regard to the regulation of business is now virtually complete .
it has been put forth , as we intended , as a whole , and leaves no conjecture as to what is to follow .
the road at last lies clear and firm before business .
it is a road which it can travel without fear or embarrassment .
it is the road to ungrudged , unclouded success .
in it every honest man , every man who believes that the public interest is part of his own interest , may walk with perfect confidence .
moreover , our thoughts are now more of the future than of the past .
while we have worked at our tasks of peace the circumstances of the whole age have been altered by war .
what we have done for our own land and our own people we did with the best that was in us , whether of character or of intelligence , with sober enthusiasm and a confidence in the principles upon which we were acting which sustained us at every step of the difficult undertaking ; but it is done .
it has passed from our hands .
it is now an established part of the legislation of the country .
its usefulness , its effects will disclose themselves in experience .
what chiefly strikes us now , as we look about us during these closing days of a year which will be forever memorable in the history of the world , is that we face new tasks , have been facing them these six months , must face them in the months to come , face them without partisan feeling , like men who have forgotten everything but a common duty and the fact that we are representatives of a great people whose thought is not of us but of what america owes to herself and to all mankind in such circumstances as these upon which we look amazed and anxious .
war has interrupted the means of trade not only but also the processes of production .
in europe it is destroying men and resources wholesale and upon a scale unprecedented and appalling , there is reason to fear that the time is near , if it be not already at hand , when several of the countries of europe will find it difficult to do for their people what they have hitherto been always easily able to do , -- many essential and fundamental things .
at any rate , they will need our help and our manifold services as they have never needed them before ; and we should be ready , more fit and ready than we have ever been .
it is of equal consequence that the nations whom europe has usually supplied with innumerable articles of manufacture and commerce of which they are in constant need and without which their economic development halts and stands still can now get only a small part of what they formerly imported and eagerly look to us to supply their all but empty markets .
this is particularly true of our own neighbors , the states , great and small , of central and south america .
their lines of trade have hitherto run chiefly athwart the seas , not to our ports but to the ports of great britain and of the older continent of europe .
i do not stop to inquire why , or to make any comment on probable causes .
what interests us just now is not the explanation but the fact , and our duty and opportunity in the presence of it .
here are markets which we must supply , and we must find the means of action .
the united states , this great people for whom we speak and act , should be ready , as never before , to serve itself and to serve mankind ; ready with its resources , its energies , its forces of production , and its means of distribution .
it is a very practical matter , a matter of ways and means .
we have the resources , but are we fully ready to use them ?
and , if we can make ready what we have , have we the means at hand to distribute it ?
we are not fully ready ; neither have we the means of distribution .
we are willing , but we are not fully able .
we have the wish to serve and to serve greatly , generously ; but we are not prepared as we should be .
we are not ready to mobilize our resources at once .
we are not prepared to use them immediately and at their best , without delay and without waste .
to speak plainly , we have grossly erred in the way in which we have stunted and hindered the development of our merchant marine .
and now , when we need ships , we have not got them .
we have year after year debated , without end or conclusion , the best policy to pursue with regard to the use of the ores and forests and water powers of our national domain in the rich states of the west , when we should have acted ; and they are still locked up .
the key is still turned upon them , the door shut fast at which thousands of vigorous men , full of initiative , knock clamorously for admittance .
the water power of our navigable streams outside the national domain also , even in the eastern states , where we have worked and planned for generations , is still not used as it might be , because we will and we wo n't ; because the laws we have made do not intelligently balance encouragement against restraint .
we withhold by regulation .
i have come to ask you to remedy and correct these mistakes and omissions , even at this short session of a congress which would certainly seem to have done all the work that could reasonably be expected of it .
the time and the circumstances are extraordinary , and so must our efforts be also .
fortunately , two great measures , finely conceived , the one to unlock , with proper safeguards , the resources of the national domain , the other to encourage the use of the navigable waters outside that domain for the generation of power , have already passed the house of representatives and are ready for immediate consideration and action by the senate .
with the deepest earnestness i urge their prompt passage .
in them both we turn our backs upon hesitation and makeshift and formulate a genuine policy of use and conservation , in the best sense of those words .
we owe the one measure not only to the people of that great western country for whose free and systematic development , as it seems to me , our legislation has done so little , but also to the people of the nation as a whole ; and we as clearly owe the other fulfillment of our repeated promises that the water power of the country should in fact as well as in name be put at the disposal of great industries which can make economical and profitable use of it , the rights of the public being adequately guarded the while , and monopoly in the use prevented .
to have begun such measures and not completed them would indeed mar the record of this great congress very seriously .
i hope and confidently believe that they will be completed .
and there is another great piece of legislation which awaits and should receive the sanction of the senate : i mean the bill which gives a larger measure of self - government to the people of the philippines .
how better , in this time of anxious questioning and perplexed policy , could we show our confidence in the principles of liberty , as the source as well as the expression of life , how better could we demonstrate our own self - possession and steadfastness in the courses of justice and disinterestedness than by thus going calmly forward to fulfill our promises to a dependent people , who will now look more anxiously than ever to see whether we have indeed the liberality , the unselfishness , the courage , the faith we have boasted and professed .
i can not believe that the senate will let this great measure of constructive justice await the action of another congress .
its passage would nobly crown the record of these two years of memorable labor .
but i think that you will agree with me that this does not complete the toll of our duty .
how are we to carry our goods to the empty markets of which i have spoken if we have not the ships ?
how are we to build tip a great trade if we have not the certain and content means of transportation upon which all profitable and useful commerce depends ?
and how are we to get the ships if we wait for the trade to develop without them ?
to correct the many mistakes by which we have discouraged and all but destroyed the merchant marine of the country , to retrace the steps by which we have .. it seems almost deliberately , withdrawn our flag from the seas .. except where , here and there , a ship of war is bidden carry it or some wandering yacht displays it , would take a long time and involve many detailed items of legislation , and tile trade which we ought immediately to handle would disappear or find other channels while we debated the items .
the case is not unlike that which confronted us when our own continent was to be opened up to settlement and industry , and we needed long lines of railway , extended means of transportation prepared beforehand , if development was not to lag intolerably and wait interminably .
we lavishly subsidized the building of transcontinental railroads .
we look back upon that with regret now , because the subsidies led to many scandals of which we are ashamed ; but we know that the railroads had to be built , and if we had it to do over again we should of course build them , but in another way .
therefore i propose another way of providing the means of transportation , which must precede , not tardily follow , the development of our trade with our neighbor states of america .
it may seem a reversal of the natural order of things , but it is true , that the routes of trade must be actually opened -- by many ships and regular sailings and moderate charges -- before streams of merchandise will flow freely and profitably through them .
hence the pending shipping bill , discussed at the last session but as yet passed by neither house .
in my judgment such legislation is imperatively needed and can not wisely be postponed .
the government must open these gates of trade , and open them wide ; open them before it is altogether profitable to open them , or altogether reasonable to ask private capital to open them at a venture .
it is not a question of the government monopolizing the field .
it should take action to make it certain that transportation at reasonable rates will be promptly provided , even where the carriage is not at first profitable ; and then , when the carriage has become sufficiently profitable to attract and engage private capital , and engage it in abundance , the government ought to withdraw .
i very earnestly hope that the congress will be of this opinion , and that both houses will adopt this exceedingly important bill .
the great subject of rural credits still remains to be dealt with , and it is a matter of deep regret that the difficulties of the subject have seemed to render it impossible to complete a bill for passage at this session .
but it can not be perfected yet , and therefore there are no other constructive measures the necessity for which i will at this time call your attention to ; but i would be negligent of a very manifest duty were i not to call the attention of the senate to the fact that the proposed convention for safety at sea awaits its confirmation and that the limit fixed in the convention itself for its acceptance is the last day of the present month .
the conference in which this convention originated was called by the united states ; the representatives of the united states played a very influential part indeed in framing the provisions of the proposed convention ; and those provisions are in themselves for the most part admirable .
it would hardly be consistent with the part we have played in the whole matter to let it drop and go by the board as if forgotten and neglected .
it was ratified in may by the german government and in august by the parliament of great britain .
it marks a most hopeful and decided advance in international civilization .
we should show our earnest good faith in a great matter by adding our own acceptance of it .
there is another matter of which i must make special mention , if i am to discharge my conscience , lest it should escape your attention .
it may seem a very small thing .
it affects only a single item of appropriation .
but many human lives and many great enterprises hang upon it .
it is the matter of making adequate provision for the survey and charting of our coasts .
it is immediately pressing and exigent in connection with the immense coast line of alaska , a coast line greater than that of the united states themselves , though it is also very important indeed with regard to the older coasts of the continent .
we can not use our great alaskan domain , ships will not ply thither , if those coasts and their many hidden dangers are not thoroughly surveyed and charted .
the work is incomplete at almost every point .
ships and lives have been lost in threading what were supposed to be well - known main channels .
we have not provided adequate vessels or adequate machinery for the survey and charting .
we have used old vessels that were not big enough or strong enough and which were so nearly unseaworthy that our inspectors would not have allowed private owners to send them to sea .
this is a matter which , as i have said , seems small , but is in reality very great .
its importance has only to be looked into to be appreciated .
before i close may i say a few words upon two topics , much discussed out of doors , upon which it is highly important that our judgment should be clear , definite , and steadfast?one of these is economy in government expenditures .
the duty of economy is not debatable .
it is manifest and imperative .
in the appropriations we pass we are spending the money of the great people whose servants we are , not our own .
we are trustees and responsible stewards in the spending .
the only thing debatable and upon which we should be careful to make our thought and purpose clear is the kind of economy demanded of us .
i assert with the greatest confidence that the people of the united states are not jealous of the amount their government costs if they are sure that they get what they need and desire for the outlay , that the money is being spent for objects of which they approve , and that it is being applied with good business sense and management .
governments grow , piecemeal , both in their tasks and in the means by which those tasks are to be performed , and very few governments are organized , i venture to say , as wise and experienced business men would organize them if they had a clean sheet of paper to write upon .
certainly the government of the united states is not .
i think that it is generally agreed that there should be a systematic reorganization and reassembling of its parts so as to secure greater efficiency and effect considerable savings in expense .
but the amount of money saved in that way would , i believe , though no doubt considerable in itself , running , it may be , into the millions , be relatively small , small , i mean , in proportion to the total necessary outlays of the government .
it would be thoroughly worth effecting , as every saving would , great or small .
our duty is not altered by the scale of the saving .
but my point is that the people of the united states do not wish to curtail the activities of this government ; they wish , rather , to enlarge them ; and with every enlargement , with the mere growth , indeed , of the country itself , there must come , of course , the inevitable increase of expense .
the sort of economy we ought to practice may be effected , and ought to be effected , by a careful study and assessment of the tasks to be performed ; and the money spent ought to be made to yield the best possible returns in efficiency and achievement .
and , like good stewards , we should so account for every dollar of our appropriations as to make it perfectly evident what it was spent for and in what way it was spent .
it is not expenditure but extravagance that we should fear being criticized for ; not paying for the legitimate enterprise and undertakings of a great government whose people command what it should do , but adding what will benefit only a few or pouring money out for what need not have been undertaken at all or might have been postponed or better and more economically conceived and carried out .
the nation is not niggardly ; it is very generous .
it will chide us only if we forget for whom we pay money out and whose money it is we pay .
these are large and general standards , but they are not very difficult of application to particular cases .
the other topic i shall take leave to mention goes deeper into the principles of our national life and policy .
it is the subject of national defense .
it can not be discussed without first answering some very searching questions .
it is said in some quarters that we are not prepared for war .
what is meant by being prepared ?
is it meant that we are not ready upon brief notice to put a nation in the field , a nation of men trained to arms ?
of course we are not ready to do that ; and we shall never be in time of peace so long as we retain our present political principles and institutions .
and what is it that it is suggested we should be prepared to do ?
to defend ourselves against attack ?
we have always found means to do that , and shall find them whenever it is necessary without calling our people away from their necessary tasks to render compulsory military service in times of peace .
allow me to speak with great plainness and directness upon this great matter and to avow my convictions with deep earnestness .
i have tried to know what america is , what her people think , what they are , what they most cherish and hold dear .
i hope that some of their finer passions are in my own heart , -- some of the great conceptions and desires which gave birth to this government and which have made the voice of this people a voice of peace and hope and liberty among the peoples of the world , and that , speaking my own thoughts , i shall , at least in part , speak theirs also , however faintly and inadequately , upon this vital matter .
we are at peace with all the world .
no one who speaks counsel based on fact or drawn from a just and candid interpretation of realities can say that there is reason to fear that from any quarter our independence or the integrity of our territory is threatened .
dread of the power of any other nation we are incapable of .
we are not jealous of rivalry in the fields of commerce or of any other peaceful achievement .
we mean to live our own lives as we will ; but we mean also to let live .
we are , indeed , a true friend to all the nations of the world , because we threaten none , covet the possessions of none , desire the overthrow of none .
our friendship can be accepted and is accepted without reservation , because it is offered in a spirit and for a purpose which no one need ever question or suspect .
therein lies our greatness .
we are the champions of peace and of concord .
and we should be very jealous of this distinction which we have sought to earn .
just now we should be particularly jealous of it because it is our dearest present hope that this character and reputation may presently , in god 's providence , bring us an opportunity such as has seldom been vouchsafed any nation , the opportunity to counsel and obtain peace in the world and reconciliation and a healing settlement of many a matter that has cooled and interrupted the friendship of nations .
this is the time above all others when we should wish and resolve to keep our strength by self - possession , our influence by preserving our ancient principles of action .
from the first we have had a clear and settled policy with regard to military establishments .
we never have had , and while we retain our present principles and ideals we never shall have , a large standing army .
if asked , are you ready to defend yourselves ?
we reply , most assuredly , to the utmost ; and yet we shall not turn america into a military camp .
we will not ask our young men to spend the best years of their lives making soldiers of themselves .
there is another sort of energy in us .
it will know how to declare itself and make itself effective should occasion arise .
and especially when half the world is on fire we shall be careful to make our moral insurance against the spread of the conflagration very definite and certain and adequate indeed .
let us remind ourselves , therefore , of the only thing we can do or will do .
we must depend in every time of national peril , in the future as in the past , not upon a standing army , nor yet upon a reserve army , but upon a citizenry trained and accustomed to arms .
it will be right enough , right american policy , based upon our accustomed principles and practices , to provide a system by which every citizen who will volunteer for the training may be made familiar with the use of modern arms , the rudiments of drill and maneuver , and the maintenance and sanitation of camps .
we should encourage such training and make it a means of discipline which our young men will learn to value .
it is right that we should provide it not only , but that we should make it as attractive as possible , and so induce our young men to undergo it at such times as they can command a little freedom and can seek the physical development they need , for mere health 's sake , if for nothing more .
every means by which such things can be stimulated is legitimate , and such a method smacks of true american ideas .
it is right , too , that the national guard of the states should be developed and strengthened by every means which is not inconsistent with our obligations to our own people or with the established policy of our government .
and this , also , not because the time or occasion specially calls for such measures , but because it should be our constant policy to make these provisions for our national peace and safety .
more than this carries with it a reversal of the whole history and character of our polity .
more than this , proposed at this time , permit me to say , would mean merely that we had lost our self - possession , that we had been thrown off our balance by a war with which we have nothing to do , whose causes can not touch us , whose very existence affords us opportunities of friendship and disinterested service which should make us ashamed of any thought of hostility or fearful preparation for trouble .
this is assuredly the opportunity for which a people and a government like ours were raised up , the opportunity not only to speak but actually to embody and exemplify the counsels of peace and amity and the lasting concord which is based on justice and fair and generous dealing .
a powerful navy we have always regarded as our proper and natural means of defense , and it has always been of defense that we have thought , never of aggression or of conquest .
but who shall tell us now what sort of navy to build ?
we shall take leave to be strong upon the seas , in the future as in the past ; and there will be no thought of offense or of provocation in that .
our ships are our natural bulwarks .
when will the experts tell us just what kind we should construct - and when will they be right for ten years together , if the relative efficiency of craft of different kinds and uses continues to change as we have seen it change under our very eyes in these last few months ?
but i turn away from the subject .
it is not new .
there is no new need to discuss it .
we shall not alter our attitude toward it because some amongst us are nervous and excited .
we shall easily and sensibly agree upon a policy of defense .
the question has not changed its aspects because the times are not normal .
our policy will not be for an occasion .
it will be conceived as a permanent and settled thing , which we will pursue at all seasons , without haste and after a fashion perfectly consistent with the peace of the world , the abiding friendship of states , and the unhampered freedom of all with whom we deal .
let there be no misconception .
the country has been misinformed .
we have not been negligent of national defense .
we are not unmindful of the great responsibility resting upon us .
we shall learn and profit by the lesson of every experience and every new circumstance ; and what is needed will be adequately done .
i close , as i began , by reminding you of the great tasks and duties of peace which challenge our best powers and invite us to build what will last , the tasks to which we can address ourselves now and at all times with free - hearted zest and with all the finest gifts of constructive wisdom we possess .
to develop our life and our resources ; to supply our own people , and the people of the world as their need arises , from the abundant plenty of our fields and our marts of trade to enrich the commerce of our own states and of the world with the products of our mines , our farms , and our factories , with the creations of our thought and the fruits of our character , this is what will hold our attention and our enthusiasm steadily , now and in the years to come , as we strive to show in our life as a nation what liberty and the inspirations of an emancipated spirit may do for men and for societies , for individuals , for states , and for mankind .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 it is my duty to call your attention to a situation which has arisen in our dealings with general victoriano huerta at mexico city which calls for action , and to ask your advice and cooperation in acting upon it .
on the 9th of april a paymaster of the u. s.s. dolphin landed at the iturbide bridge landing at tampico with a whaleboat and boat 's crew to take off certain supplies needed by his ship , and while engaged in loading the boat was arrested by an officer and squad of men of the army of general huerta .
neither the paymaster nor anyone of the boat 's crew was armed .
two of the men were in the boat when the arrest took place and were obliged to leave it and submit to be taken into custody , notwithstanding the fact that the boat carried , both at her bow and at her stern , the flag of the united states .
the officer who made the arrest was proceeding up one of the streets of the town with his prisoners when met by an officer of higher authority , who ordered him to return to the landing and await orders ; and within an hour and a half from the time of the arrest orders were received from the commander of the huertista forces at tampico for the release of the paymaster and his men .
the release was followed by apologies from the commander and later by an expression of regret by general huerta himself .
general huerta urged that martial law obtained at the time at tampico ; that orders had been issued that no one should be allowed to land at the iturbide bridge ; and that our sailors had no right to land there .
our naval commanders at the port had not been notified of any such prohibition ; and , even if they had been , the only justifiable course open to the local authorities would have been to request the paymaster and his crew to withdraw and to lodge a protest with the commanding officer of the fleet .
admiral mayo regarded the arrest as so serious an affront that he was not satisfied with the apologies offered , but demanded that the flag of the united states be saluted with special ceremony by the military commander of the port .
the incident can not be regarded as a trivial one , especially as two of the men arrested were taken from the boat itself -- that is to say , from the territory of the united states -- but had it stood by itself it might have been attributed to the ignorance or arrogance of a single officer .
unfortunately , it was not an isolated case .
a series of incidents have recently occurred which can not but create the impression that the representatives of general huerta were willing to go out of their way to show disregard for the dignity and rights of this government and felt perfectly safe in doing what they pleased , making free to show in many ways their irritation and contempt .
a few days after the incident at tampico an orderly from the u. s.s. minnesota was arrested at vera cruz while ashore in uniform to obtain the ship 's mail , and was for a time thrown into jail .
an official dispatch from this government to its embassy at mexico city was withheld by the authorities of the telegraphic service until peremptorily demanded by our charge d'affaires in person .
so far as i can learn , such wrongs and annoyances have been suffered to occur only against representatives of the united states .
i have heard of no complaints from other governments of similar treatment .
subsequent explanations and formal apologies did not and could not alter the popular impression , which it is possible it had been the object of the huertista authorities to create , that the government of the united states was being singled out , and might be singled out with impunity , for slights and affronts in retaliation for its refusal to recognize the pretensions of general huerta to be regarded as the constitutional provisional president of the republic of mexico .
the manifest danger of such a situation was that such offenses might grow from bad to worse until something happened of so gross and intolerable a sort as to lead directly and inevitably to armed conflict .
it was necessary that the apologies of general huerta and his representatives should go much further , that they should be such as to attract the attention of the whole population to their significance , and such as to impress upon general huerta himself the necessity of seeing to it that no further occasion for explanations and professed regrets should arise .
i , therefore , felt it my duty to sustain admiral mayo in the whole of his demand and to insist that the flag of the united states should be saluted in such a way as to indicate a new spirit and attitude on the part of the huertistas .
such a salute general huerta has refused , and i have come to ask your approval and support in the course i now purpose to pursue .
this government can , i earnestly hope , in no circumstances be forced into war with the people of mexico .
mexico is torn by civil strife .
if we are to accept the tests of its own constitution , it has no government .
general huerta has set his power up in the city of mexico , such as it is , without right and by methods for which there can be no justification .
only part of the country is under his control .
if armed conflict should unhappily come as a result of his attitude of personal resentment toward this government , we should be fighting only general huerta and those who adhere to him and give him their support , and our object would be only to restore to the people of the distracted republic the opportunity to set up again their own laws and their own government .
but i earnestly hope that war is not now in question .
i believe that i speak for the american people when i say that we do not desire to control in any degree the affairs of our sister republic .
our feeling for the people of mexico is one of deep and genuine friendship , and everything that we have so far done or refrained from doing has proceeded from our desire to help them , not to hinder or embarrass them .
we would not wish even to exercise the good offices of friendship without their welcome and consent .
the people of mexico are entitled to settle their own domestic affairs in their own way , and we sincerely desire to respect their right .
the present situation need have none of the grave implications of interference if we deal with it promptly , firmly , and wisely .
no doubt i could do what is necessary in the circumstances to enforce respect for our government without recourse to the congress , and yet not exceed my constitutional powers as president ; but i do not wish to act in a matter possibly of so grave consequence except in close conference and cooperation with both the senate and house .
i , therefore , come to ask your approval that i should use the armed forces of the united states in such ways and to such an extent as may be necessary to obtain from general huerta and his adherents the fullest recognition of the rights and dignity of the united states , even amidst the distressing conditions now unhappily obtaining in mexico .
there can in what we do be no thought of aggression or of selfish aggrandizement .
we seek to maintain the dignity and authority of the united states only because we wish always to keep our great influence unimpaired for the uses of liberty , both in the united states and wherever else it may be employed for the benefit of mankind .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 a situation has arisen in the foreign relations of the country of which it is my plain duty to inform you very frankly .
it will be recalled that in february , 1915 , the imperial german government announced its intention to treat the waters surrounding great britain and ireland as embraced within the seat of war and to destroy all merchant ships owned by its enemies that might be found within any part of that portion of the high seas , and that it warned all vessels , of neutral as well as of belligerent ownership , to keep out of the waters it had thus proscribed or else enter them at their peril .
the government of the united states earnestly protested .
it took the position that such a policy could not be pursued without the practical certainty of gross and palpable violations of the law of nations , particularly if submarine craft were to be employed as its instruments , inasmuch as the rules prescribed by that law , rules founded upon principles of humanity and established for the protection of the lives of non - combatants at sea , could not in the nature of the case be observed by such vessels .
it based its protest on the ground that persons of neutral nationality and vessels of neutral ownership would be exposed to extreme and intolerable risks , and that no right to close any part of the high seas against their use or to expose them to such risks could lawfully be asserted by any belligerent government .
the law of nations in these matters , upon which the government of the united states based its protest , is not of recent origin or founded upon merely arbitrary principles set up by convention .
it is based , on the contrary , upon manifest and imperative principles of humanity and has long been established with the approval and by the express assent of all civilized nations .
notwithstanding the earnest protest of our government , the imperial german government at once proceeded to carry out the policy it had announced .
it expressed the hope that the dangers involved , at any rate the dangers to neutral vessels , would be reduced to a minimum by the instructions which it had issued to its submarine commanders , and assured the government of the united states that it would take every possible precaution both to respect the rights of neutrals and to safeguard the lives of non - combatants .
what has actually happened in the year which has since elapsed has shown that those hopes were not justified , those assurances insusceptible of being fulfilled .
in pursuance of the policy of submarine warfare against the commerce of its adversaries , thus announced and entered upon by the imperial german government in despite of the solemn protest of this government , the commanders of german undersea vessels have attacked merchant ships with greater and greater activity , not only upon the high seas surrounding great britain and ireland but wherever they could encounter them , in a way that has grown more and more ruthless , more and more indiscriminate as the months have gone by , less and less observant of restraints of any kind ; and have delivered their attacks without compunction against vessels of every nationality and bound upon every sort of errand .
vessels of neutral ownership , even vessels of neutral ownership bound from neutral port to neutral port , have been destroyed along with vessels of belligerent ownership in constantly increasing numbers .
sometimes the merchantman attacked has been warned and summoned to surrender before being fired on or torpedoed ; sometimes passengers or crews have been vouchsafed the poor security of being allowed to take to the ship 's boats before she was sent to the bottom .
but again and again no warning has been given , no escape even to the ship 's boats allowed to those on board .
what this government foresaw must happen has happened .
tragedy has followed tragedy on the seas in such fashion , with such attendant circumstances , as to make it grossly evident that warfare of such a sort , if warfare it be , can not be carried on without the most palpable violation of the dictates alike of right and of humanity .
whatever the disposition and intention of the imperial german government , it has manifestly proved impossible for it to keep such methods of attack upon the commerce of its enemies within the bounds set by either the reason or the heart of mankind .
in february of the present year the imperial german government informed this government and the other neutral governments of the world that it had reason to believe that the government of great britain had armed all merchant vessels of british ownership and had given them secret orders to attack any submarine of the enemy they might encounter upon the seas , and that the imperial german government felt justified in the circumstances in treating all armed merchantmen of belligerent ownership as auxiliary vessels of war , which it would have the right to destroy without warning .
the law of nations has long recognized the right of merchantmen to carry arms for protection and to use them to repel attack , though to use them , in such circumstances , at their own risk ; but the imperial german government claimed the right to set these understandings aside in circumstances which it deemed extraordinary .
even the terms in which it announced its purpose thus still further to relax the restraints it had previously professed its willingness and desire to put upon the operations of its submarines carried the plain implication that at least vessels which were not armed would still be exempt from destruction without warning and that personal safety would be accorded their passengers and crews ; but even that limitation , if it was ever practicable to observe it , has in fact constituted no check at all upon the destruction of ships of every sort .
again and again the imperial german government has given this government its solemn assurances that at least passenger ships would not be thus dealt with , and yet it has again and again permitted its undersea commanders to disregard those assurances with entire impunity .
great liners like the lusitania and the arabic and mere ferryboats like the sussex have been attacked without a moment 's warning , sometimes before they had even become aware that they were in the presence of an armed vessel of the enemy , and the lives of non - combatants , passengers and crew , have been sacrificed wholesale , in a manner which the government of the united states can not but regard as wanton and without the slightest color of justification .
no limit of any kind has in fact been set to the indiscriminate pursuit and destruction of merchantmen of all kinds and nationalities within the waters , constantly extending in area , where these operations have been carried on ; and the roll of americans who have lost their lives on ships thus attacked and destroyed has grown month by month until the ominous toll has mounted into the hundreds .
one of the latest and most shocking instances of this method of warfare was that of the destruction of the french cross - channel steamer sussex .
it must stand forth , as the sinking of the steamer lusitania did , as so singularly tragical and unjustifiable as to constitute a truly terrible example of the inhumanity of submarine warfare as the commanders of german vessels have for the past twelvemonth been conducting it .
if this instance stood alone , some explanation , some disavowal by the german government , some evidence of criminal mistake or wilful disobedience on the part of the commander of the vessel that fired the torpedo might be sought or entertained ; but unhappily it does not stand alone .
recent events make the conclusion inevitable that it is only one instance , even though it be one of the most extreme and distressing instances , of the spirit and method of warfare which the imperial german government has mistakenly adopted , and which from the first exposed that government to the reproach of thrusting all neutral rights aside in pursuit of its immediate objects .
the government of the united states has been very patient .
at every stage of this distressing experience of tragedy after tragedy in which its own citizens were involved it has sought to be restrained from any extreme course of action or of protest by a thoughtful consideration of the extraordinary circumstances of this unprecedented war , and actuated in all that it said or did by the sentiments of genuine friendship which the people of the united states have always entertained and continue to entertain towards the german nation .
it has of course accepted the successive explanations and assurances of the imperial german government as given in entire sincerity and good faith , and has hoped , even against hope , that it would prove to be possible for the german government so to order and control the acts of its naval commanders as to square its policy with the principles of humanity as embodied in the law of nations .
it has been willing to wait until the significance of the facts became absolutely unmistakable and susceptible of but one interpretation .
that point has now unhappily been reached .
the facts are susceptible of but one interpretation .
the imperial german government has been unable to put any limits or restraints upon its warfare against either freight or passenger ships .
it has therefore become painfully evident that the position which this government took at the very outset is inevitable , namely , that the use of submarines for the destruction of an enemy 's commerce is of necessity , because of the very character of the vessels employed and the very methods of attack which their employment of course involves , incompatible with the principles of humanity , the long established and incontrovertible rights of neutrals , and the sacred immunities of non - combatants .
i have deemed it my duty , therefore , to say to the imperial german government that if it is still its purpose to prosecute relentless and indiscriminate warfare against vessels of commerce by the use of submarines , notwithstanding the now demonstrated impossibility of conducting that warfare in accordance with what the government of the united states must consider the sacred and indisputable rules of international law and the universally recognized dictates of humanity , the government of the united states is at last forced to the conclusion that there is but one course it can pursue ; and that unless the imperial german government should now immediately declare and effect an abandonment of its present methods of warfare against passenger and freight carrying vessels this government can have no choice but to sever diplomatic relations with the government of the german empire altogether .
this decision i have arrived at with the keenest regret ; the possibility of the action contemplated i am sure all thoughtful americans will look forward to with unaffected reluctance .
but we can not forget that we are in some sort and by the force of circumstances the responsible spokesmen of the rights of humanity , and that we can not remain silent while those rights seem in process of being swept utterly away in the maelstrom of this terrible war .
we owe it to a due regard for our own rights as a nation , to our sense of duty as a representative of the rights of neutrals the world over , and to a just conception of the rights of mankind to take this stand now with the utmost solemnity and firmness .
i have taken it , and taken it in the confidence that it will meet with your approval and support .
all sober - minded men must unite in hoping that the imperial german government , which has in other circumstances stood as the champion of all that we are now contending for in the interest of humanity , may recognize the justice of our demands and meet them in the spirit in which they are made .

ladies and gentlemen : 
 i have not come here to - day with a prepared address .
the committee in charge of the exercises of the day have graciously excused me on the grounds of public obligations from preparing such an address , but i will not deny myself the privilege of joining with you in an expression of gratitude and admiration for the men who perished for the sake of the union .
they do not need our praise .
they do not need that our admiration should sustain them .
there is no immortality that is safer than theirs .
we come not for their sakes but for our own , in order that we may drink at the same springs of inspiration from which they themselves selves drank .
a peculiar privilege came to the men who fought for the union .
there is no other civil war in history , ladies and gentlemen , the stings of which were removed before the men who did the fighting passed from the stage of life .
so that we owe these men something more than a legal reestablishment of the union .
we owe them the spiritual reestablishment of the union as well ; for they not only reunited states , they reunited the spirits of men .
that is their unique achievement , unexampled anywhere else in the annals of mankind , that the very men whom they overcame in battle join in praise and gratitude that the union was saved .
there is something peculiarly beautiful and peculiarly touching about that .
whenever a man who is still trying to devote himself to the service of the nation comes into a presence like this , or into a place like this , his spirit must be peculiarly moved .
a mandate is laid upon him which seems to speak from the very graves themselves .
those who serve this nation , whether in peace or in war , should serve it without thought of themselves .
i can never speak in praise of war , ladies and gentlemen ; you would not desire me to do so .
but there is this peculiar distinction belonging to the soldier , that he goes into an enterprise out of which he himself can not get anything at all .
he is giving everything that he hath , even his life , in order that others may live , not in order that he himself may obtain gain and prosperity .
and just so soon as the tasks of peace are performed in the same spirit of self - sacrifice and devotion , peace societies will not be necessary .
the very organization and spirit of society will be a guaranty of peace .
therefore this peculiar thing comes about , that we can stand here and praise the memory of these soldiers in the interest of peace .
they set us the example of self - sacrifice , which if followed in peace will make it unnecessary that men should follow war any more .
we are reputed to be somewhat careless in our discrimination between words in the use of the english language , and yet it is interesting to note that there are some words about which we are very careful .
we bestow the adjective " great " somewhat indiscriminately .
a man who has made conquest of his fellow - men for his own gain may display such genius in war , such uncommon qualities of organization and leadership that we may call him " great , " but there is a word which we reserve for men of another kind and about which we are very careful ; that is the word " noble . "
we never call a man " noble " who serves only himself ; and if you will look about through all the nations of the world upon the statues that men have erected -- upon the inscribed tablets where they have wished to keep alive the memory of the citizens whom they desire most to honor -- you will find that almost without exception they have erected the statue to those who had a splendid surplus of energy and devotion to spend upon their fellow - men .
nobility exists in america without patent .
we have no house of lords , but we have a house of fame to which we elevate those who are the noble men of our race , who , forgetful of themselves , study and serve the public interest , who have the courage to face any number and any kind of adversary , to speak what in their hearts they believe to be the truth .
we admire physical courage , but we admire above all things else moral courage .
i believe that soldiers will bear me out in saying that both come in time of battle .
i take it that the moral courage comes in going into the battle , and the physical courage in staying in .
there are battles which are just as hard to go into and just as hard to stay in as the battles of arms , and if the man will but stay and think never of himself there will come a time of grateful recollection when men will speak of him not only with admiration but with that which goes deeper , with affection and with reverence .
so that this flag calls upon us daily for service , and the more quiet and self - denying the service the greater the glory of the flag .
we are dedicated to freedom , and that freedom means the freedom of the human spirit .
all free spirits ought to congregate on an occasion like this to do homage to the greatness of america as illustrated by the greatness of her sons .
it has been a privilege , ladies and gentlemen , to come and say these simple words , which i am sure are merely putting your thought into language .
i thank you for the opportunity to lay this little wreath of mine upon these consecrated graves .

there has been a change of government .
it began two years ago , when the house of representatives became democratic by a decisive majority .
it has now been completed .
the senate about to assemble will also be democratic .
the offices of president and vice - president have been put into the hands of democrats .
what does the change mean ?
that is the question that is uppermost in our minds to - day .
that is the question i am going to try to answer , in order , if i may , to interpret the occasion .
it means much more than the mere success of a party .
the success of a party means little except when the nation is using that party for a large and definite purpose .
no one can mistake the purpose for which the nation now seeks to use the democratic party .
it seeks to use it to interpret a change in its own plans and point of view .
some old things with which we had grown familiar , and which had begun to creep into the very habit of our thought and of our lives , have altered their aspect as we have latterly looked critically upon them , with fresh , awakened eyes ; have dropped their disguises and shown themselves alien and sinister .
some new things , as we look frankly upon them , willing to comprehend their real character , have come to assume the aspect of things long believed in and familiar , stuff of our own convictions .
we have been refreshed by a new insight into our own life .
we see that in many things that life is very great .
it is incomparably great in its material aspects , in its body of wealth , in the diversity and sweep of its energy , in the industries which have been conceived and built up by the genius of individual men and the limitless enterprise of groups of men .
it is great , also , very great , in its moral force .
nowhere else in the world have noble men and women exhibited in more striking forms the beauty and the energy of sympathy and helpfulness and counsel in their efforts to rectify wrong , alleviate suffering , and set the weak in the way of strength and hope .
we have built up , moreover , a great system of government , which has stood through a long age as in many respects a model for those who seek to set liberty upon foundations that will endure against fortuitous change , against storm and accident .
our life contains every great thing , and contains it in rich abundance .
but the evil has come with the good , and much fine gold has been corroded .
with riches has come inexcusable waste .
we have squandered a great part of what we might have used , and have not stopped to conserve the exceeding bounty of nature , without which our genius for enterprise would have been worthless and impotent , scorning to be careful , shamefully prodigal as well as admirably efficient .
we have been proud of our industrial achievements , but we have not hitherto stopped thoughtfully enough to count the human cost , the cost of lives snuffed out , of energies overtaxed and broken , the fearful physical and spiritual cost to the men and women and children upon whom the dead weight and burden of it all has fallen pitilessly the years through .
the groans and agony of it all had not yet reached our ears , the solemn , moving undertone of our life , coming up out of the mines and factories , and out of every home where the struggle had its intimate and familiar seat .
with the great government went many deep secret things which we too long delayed to look into and scrutinize with candid , fearless eyes .
the great government we loved has too often been made use of for private and selfish purposes , and those who used it had forgotten the people .
at last a vision has been vouchsafed us of our life as a whole .
we see the bad with the good , the debased and decadent with the sound and vital .
with this vision we approach new affairs .
our duty is to cleanse , to reconsider , to restore , to correct the evil without impairing the good , to purify and humanize every process of our common life without weakening or sentimentalizing it .
there has been something crude and heartless and unfeeling in our haste to succeed and be great .
our thought has been  let every man look out for himself , let every generation look out for itself ,  while we reared giant machinery which made it impossible that any but those who stood at the levers of control should have a chance to look out for themselves .
we had not forgotten our morals .
we remembered well enough that we had set up a policy which was meant to serve the humblest as well as the most powerful , with an eye single to the standards of justice and fair play , and remembered it with pride .
but we were very heedless and in a hurry to be great .
we have come now to the sober second thought .
the scales of heedlessness have fallen from our eyes .
we have made up our minds to square every process of our national life again with the standards we so proudly set up at the beginning and have always carried at our hearts .
our work is a work of restoration .
we have itemized with some degree of particularity the things that ought to be altered and here are some of the chief items : a tariff which cuts us off from our proper part in the commerce of the world , violates the just principles of taxation , and makes the government a facile instrument in the hand of private interests ; a banking and currency system based upon the necessity of the government to sell its bonds fifty years ago and perfectly adapted to concentrating cash and restricting credits ; an industrial system which , take it on all its sides , financial as well as administrative , holds capital in leading strings , restricts the liberties and limits the opportunities of labor , and exploits without renewing or conserving the natural resources of the country ; a body of agricultural activities never yet given the efficiency of great business undertakings or served as it should be through the instrumentality of science taken directly to the farm , or afforded the facilities of credit best suited to its practical needs ; watercourses undeveloped , waste places unreclaimed , forests untended , fast disappearing without plan or prospect of renewal , unregarded waste heaps at every mine .
we have studied as perhaps no other nation has the most effective means of production , but we have not studied cost or economy as we should either as organizers of industry , as statesmen , or as individuals .
nor have we studied and perfected the means by which government may be put at the service of humanity , in safeguarding the health of the nation , the health of its men and its women and its children , as well as their rights in the struggle for existence .
this is no sentimental duty .
the firm basis of government is justice , not pity .
these are matters of justice .
there can be no equality or opportunity , the first essential of justice in the body politic , if men and women and children be not shielded in their lives , their very vitality , from the consequences of great industrial and social processes which they can not alter , control , or singly cope with .
society must see to it that it does not itself crush or weaken or damage its own constituent parts .
the first duty of law is to keep sound the society it serves .
sanitary laws , pure food laws , and laws determining conditions of labor which individuals are powerless to determine for themselves are intimate parts of the very business of justice and legal efficiency .
these are some of the things we ought to do , and not leave the others undone , the old - fashioned , never - to - be - neglected , fundamental safeguarding of property and of individual right .
this is the high enterprise of the new day : to lift everything that concerns our life as a nation to the light that shines from the hearthfire of every man s conscience and vision of the right .
it is inconceivable that we should do this as partisans ; it is inconceivable we should do it in ignorance of the facts as they are or in blind haste .
we shall restore , not destroy .
we shall deal with our economic system as it is and as it may be modified , not as it might be if we had a clean sheet of paper to write upon ; and step by step we shall make it what it should be , in the spirit of those who question their own wisdom and seek counsel and knowledge , not shallow self - satisfaction or the excitement of excursions whither they can not tell .
justice , and only justice , shall always be our motto .
and yet it will be no cool process of mere science .
the nation has been deeply stirred , stirred by a solemn passion , stirred by the knowledge of wrong , of ideals lost , of government too often debauched and made an instrument of evil .
the feelings with which we face this new age of right and opportunity sweep across our heartstrings like some air out of god s own presence , where justice and mercy are reconciled and the judge and the brother are one .
we know our task to be no mere task of politics but a task which shall search us through and through , whether we be able to understand our time and the need of our people , whether we be indeed their spokesmen and interpreters , whether we have the pure heart to comprehend and the rectified will to choose our high course of action .
this is not a day of triumph ; it is a day of dedication .
here muster , not the forces of party , but the forces of humanity .
men s hearts wait upon us ; men s lives hang in the balance ; men s hopes call upon us to say what we will do .
who shall live up to the great trust ?
who dares fail to try ?
i summon all honest men , all patriotic , all forward - looking men , to my side .
god helping me , i will not fail them , if they will but counsel and sustain me !

gentlemen of the congress : 
 once more , as repeatedly before , the spokesmen of the central empires have indicated their desire to discuss the objects of the war and the possible bases of a general peace .
parleys have been in progress at brest - litovsk between russian representatives and representatives of the central powers to which the attention of all the belligerents has been invited for the purpose of ascertaining whether it may be possible to extend these parleys into a general conference with regard to terms of peace and settlement .
the russian representatives presented not only a perfectly definite statement of the principles upon which they would be willing to conclude peace but also an equally definite program of the concrete application of those principles .
the representatives of the central powers , on their part , presented an outline of settlement which , if much less definite , seemed susceptible of liberal interpretation until their specific program of practical terms was added .
that program proposed no concessions at all either to the sovereignty of russia or to the preferences of the populations with whose fortunes it dealt , but meant , in a word , that the central empires were to keep every foot of territory their armed forces had occupied , -- every province , every city , every point of vantage , -- as a permanent addition to their territories and their power .
it is a reasonable conjecture that the general principles of settlement which they at first suggested originated with the more liberal statesmen of germany and austria , the men who have begun to feel the force of their own peoples ' thought and purpose , while the concrete terms of actual settlement came from the military leaders who have no thought but to keep what they have got .
the negotiations have been broken off .
the russian representatives were sincere and in earnest .
they can not entertain such proposals of conquest and domination .
the whole incident is full of significance .
it is also full of perplexity .
with whom are the russian representatives dealing ?
for whom are the representatives of the central empires speaking ?
are they speaking for the majorities of their respective parliaments or for the minority parties , that military and imperialistic minority which has so far dominated their whole policy and controlled the affairs of turkey and of the balkan states which have felt obliged to become their associates in this war ?
the russian representatives have insisted , very justly , very wisely , and in the true spirit of modern democracy , that the conferences they have been holding with the teutonic and turkish statesmen should be held within open , not closed , doors , and all the world has been audience , as was desired .
to whom have we been listening , then ?
to those who speak the spirit and intention of the resolutions of the german reichstag of the ninth of july last , the spirit and intention of the liberal leaders and parties of germany , or to those who resist and defy that spirit and intention and insist upon conquest and subjugation ?
or are we listening , in fact , to both , unreconciled and in open and hopeless contradiction ?
these are very serious and pregnant questions .
upon the answer to them depends the peace of the world .
but , whatever the results of the parleys at brest - litovsk , whatever the confusions of counsel and of purpose in the utterances of the spokesmen of the central empires , they have again attempted to acquaint the world with their objects in the war and have again challenged their adversaries to say what their objects are and what sort of settlement they would deem just and satisfactory .
there is no good reason why that challenge should not be responded to , and responded to with the utmost candor .
we did not wait for it .
not once , but again and again , we have laid our whole thought and purpose before the world , not in general terms only , but each time with sufficient definition to make it clear what sort of definitive terms of settlement must necessarily spring out of them .
within the last week mr. lloyd george has spoken with admirable candor and in admirable spirit for the people and government of great britain .
there is no confusion of counsel among the adversaries of the central powers , no uncertainty of principle , no vagueness of detail .
the only secrecy of counsel , the only lack of fearless frankness , the only failure to make definite statement of the objects of the war , lies with germany and her allies .
the issues of life and death hang upon these definitions .
no statesman who has the least conception of his responsibility ought for a moment to permit himself to continue this tragical and appalling outpouring of blood and treasure unless he is sure beyond a peradventure that the objects of the vital sacrifice are part and parcel of the very life of society and that the people for whom he speaks think them right and imperative as he does .
there is , moreover , a voice calling for these definitions of principle and of purpose which is , it seems to me , more thrilling and more compelling than any of the many moving voices with which the troubled air of the world is filled .
it is the voice of the russian people .
they are prostrate and all but helpless , it would seem , before the grim power of germany , which has hitherto known no relenting and no pity .
their power , apparently , is shattered .
and yet their soul is not subservient .
they will not yield either in principle or in action .
their conception of what is right , of what it is humane and honorable for them to accept , has been stated with a frankness , a largeness of view , a generosity of spirit , and a universal human sympathy which must challenge the admiration of every friend of mankind ; and they have refused to compound their ideals or desert others that they themselves may be safe .
they call to us to say what it is that we desire , in what , if in anything , our purpose and our spirit differ from theirs ; and i believe that the people of the united states would wish me to respond , with utter simplicity and frankness .
whether their present leaders believe it or not , it is our heartfelt desire and hope that some way may be opened whereby we may be privileged to assist the people of russia to attain their utmost hope of liberty and ordered peace .
it will be our wish and purpose that the processes of peace , when they are begun , shall be absolutely open and that they shall involve and permit henceforth no secret understandings of any kind .
the day of conquest and aggrandizement is gone by ; so is also the day of secret covenants entered into in the interest of particular governments and likely at some unlooked - for moment to upset the peace of the world .
it is this happy fact , now clear to the view of every public man whose thoughts do not still linger in an age that is dead and gone , which makes it possible for every nation whose purposes are consistent with justice and the peace of the world to avow now or at any other time the objects it has in view .
we entered this war because violations of right had occurred which touched us to the quick and made the life of our own people impossible unless they were corrected and the world secured once for all against their recurrence .
what we demand in this war , therefore , is nothing peculiar to ourselves .
it is that the world be made fit and safe to live in ; and particularly that it be made safe for every peace - loving nation which , like our own , wishes to live its own life , determine its own institutions , be assured of justice and fair dealing by the other peoples of the world as against force and selfish aggression .
all the peoples of the world are in effect partners in this interest , and for our own part we see very clearly that unless justice be done to others it will not be done to us .
the program of the world 's peace , therefore , is our program ; and that program , the only possible program , as we see it , is this : 
 i. open covenants of peace , openly arrived at , after which there shall be no private international understandings of any kind , but diplomacy shall proceed always frankly and in the public view .
ii .
absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas , outside territorial waters , alike in peace and in war , except as the seas may be closed in whole or in part by international action for the enforcement of international covenants .
iii .
the removal , so far as possible , of all economic barriers and the establishment of an equality of trade conditions among all the nations consenting to the peace and associating themselves for its maintenance .
iv .
adequate guarantees given and taken that national armaments will be reduced to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety .
v. a free , open - minded , and absolutely impartial adjustment of all colonial claims , based upon a strict observance of the principle that in determining all such questions of sovereignty the interests of the populations concerned must have equal weight with the equitable claims of the government whose title is to be determined .
vi .
the evacuation of all russian territory and such a settlement of all questions affecting russia as will secure the best and freest cooperation of the other nations of the world in obtaining for her an unhampered and unembarrassed opportunity for the independent determination of her own political development and national policy and assure her of a sincere welcome into the society of free nations under institutions of her own choosing ; and , more than a welcome , assistance also of every kind that she may need and may herself desire .
the treatment accorded russia by her sister nations in the months to come will be the acid test of their good will , of their comprehension of her needs as distinguished from their own interests , and of their intelligent and unselfish sympathy .
vii .
belgium , the whole world will agree , must be evacuated and restored , without any attempt to limit the sovereignty which she enjoys in common with all other free nations .
no other single act will serve as this will serve to restore confidence among the nations in the laws which they have themselves set and determined for the government of their relations with one another .
without this healing act the whole structure and validity of international law is forever impaired .
viii .
all french territory should be freed and the invaded portions restored , and the wrong done to france by prussia in 1871 in the matter of alsace - lorraine , which has unsettled the peace of the world for nearly fifty years , should be righted , in order that peace may once more be made secure in the interest of all .
ix .
a readjustment of the frontiers of italy should be effected along clearly recognizable lines of nationality .
x. the peoples of austria - hungary , whose place among the nations we wish to see safeguarded and assured , should be accorded the freest opportunity of autonomous development .
xi .
rumania , serbia , and montenegro should be evacuated ; occupied territories restored ; serbia accorded free and secure access to the sea ; and the relations of the several balkan states to one another determined by friendly counsel along historically established lines of allegiance and nationality ; and international guarantees of the political and economic independence and territorial integrity of the several balkan states should be entered into .
xii .
the turkish portions of the present ottoman empire should be assured a secure sovereignty , but the other nationalities which are now under turkish rule should be assured an undoubted security of life and an absolutely unmolested opportunity of autonomous development and the dardanelles should be permanently opened as a free passage to the ships and commerce of all nations under international guarantees .
xiii .
an independent polish state should be erected which should include the territories inhabited by indisputably polish populations , which should be assured a free and secure access to the sea , and whose political and economic independence and territorial integrity should be guaranteed by international covenant .
xiv .
a general association of nations must be formed under specific covenants for the purpose of affording mutual guarantees of political independence and territorial integrity to great and small states alike .
in regard to these essential rectifications of wrong and assertions of right we feel ourselves to be intimate partners of all the governments and peoples associated together against the imperialists .
we can not be separated in interest or divided in purpose .
we stand together until the end .
for such arrangements and covenants we are willing to fight and to continue to fight until they are achieved ; but only because we wish the right to prevail and desire a just and stable peace such as can be secured only by removing the chief provocations to war , which this program does remove .
we have no jealousy of german greatness , and there is nothing in this program that impairs it .
we grudge her no achievement or distinction of learning or of pacific enterprise such as have made her record very bright and very enviable .
we do not wish to injure her or to block in any way her legitimate influence or power .
we do not wish to fight her either with arms or with hostile arrangements of trade if she is willing to associate herself with us and the other peace - loving nations of the world in covenants of justice and law and fair dealing .
we wish her only to accept a place of equality among the peoples of the world , -- the new world in which we now live , -- instead of a place of mastery .
neither do we presume to suggest to her any alteration or modification of her institutions .
but it is necessary , we must frankly say , and necessary as a preliminary to any intelligent dealings with her on our part , that we should know whom her spokesmen speak for when they speak to us , whether for the reichstag majority or for the military party and the men whose creed is imperial domination .
we have spoken now , surely , in terms too concrete to admit of any further doubt or question .
an evident principle runs through the whole program i have outlined .
it is the principle of justice to all peoples and nationalities , and their right to live on equal terms of liberty and safety with one another , whether they be strong or weak .
unless this principle be made its foundation no part of the structure of international justice can stand .
the people of the united states could act upon no other principle ; and to the vindication of this principle they are ready to devote their lives , their honor , and everything that they possess .
the moral climax of this the culminating and final war for human liberty has come , and they are ready to put their own strength , their own highest purpose , their own integrity and devotion to the test .

madam president , ladies of the association : 
 i have found it a real privilege to be here to - night and to listen to the addresses which you have heard .
though you may not all of you believe it , i would a great deal rather hear somebody else speak than speak myself ; but i should feel that i was omitting a duty if i did not address you to - night and say some of the things that have been in my thought as i realized the approach of this evening and the duty that would fall upon me .
the astonishing thing about the movement which you represent is , not that it has grown so slowly , but that it has grown so rapidly .
no doubt for those who have been a long time in the struggle , like your honored president , it seems a long and arduous path that has been trodden , but when you think of the cumulating force of this movement in recent decades , you must agree with me that it is one of the most astonishing tides in modern history .
two generations ago , no doubt madam president will agree with me in saying , it was a handful of women who were fighting this cause .
now it is a great multitude of women who are fighting it .
and there are some interesting historical connections which i would like to attempt to point out to you .
one of the most striking facts about the history of the united states is that at the outset it was a lawyers ' history .
almost all of the questions to which america addressed itself , say a hundred years ago , were legal questions , were questions of method , not questions of what you were going to do with your government , but questions of how you were going to constitute your government , -- how you were going to balance the powers of the states and the federal government , how you were going to balance the claims of property against the processes of liberty , how you were going to make your governments up so as to balance the parts against each other so that the legislature would check the executive , and the executive the legislature , and the courts both of them put together .
the whole conception of government when the united states became a nation was a mechanical conception of government , and the mechanical conception of government which underlay it was the newtonian theory of the universe .
if you pick up the federalist , some parts of it read like a treatise on astronomy instead of a treatise on government .
they speak of the centrifugal and the centripetal forces , and locate the president somewhere in a rotating system .
the whole thing is a calculation of power and an adjustment of parts .
there was a time when nobody but a lawyer could know enough to run the government of the united states , and a distinguished english publicist once remarked , speaking of the complexity of the american government , that it was no proof of the excellence of the american constitution that it had been successfully operated , because the americans could run any constitution .
but there have been a great many technical difficulties in running it .
and then something happened .
a great question arose in this country which , though complicated with legal elements , was at bottom a human question , and nothing but a question of humanity .
that was the slavery question .
and is it not significant that it was then , and then for the first time , that women became prominent in politics in america ?
not many women ; those prominent in that day were so few that you can name them over in a brief catalogue , but , nevertheless , they then began to play a part in writing , not only , but in public speech , which was a very novel part for women to play in america .
after the civil war had settled some of what seemed to be the most difficult legal questions of our system , the life of the nation began not only to unfold , but to accumulate .
life in the united states was a comparatively simple matter at the time of the civil war .
there was none of that underground struggle which is now so manifest to those who look only a little way beneath the surface .
stories such as dr. davis has told to - night were uncommon in those simpler days .
the pressure of low wages , the agony of obscure and unremunerated toil , did not exist in america in anything like the same proportions that they exist now .
and as our life has unfolded and accumulated , as the contacts of it have become hot , as the populations have assembled in the cities , and the cool spaces of the country have been supplanted by the feverish urban areas , the whole nature of our political questions has been altered .
they have ceased to be legal questions .
they have more and more become social questions , questions with regard to the relations of human beings to one another , -- not merely their legal relations , but their moral and spiritual relations to one another .
this has been most characteristic of american life in the last few decades , and as these questions have assumed greater and greater prominence , the movement which this association represents has gathered cumulative force .
so that , if anybody asks himself , " what does this gathering force mean , " if he knows anything about the history of the country , he knows that it means something that has not only come to stay , but has come with conquering power .
i get a little impatient sometimes about the discussion of the channels and methods by which it is to prevail .
it is going to prevail , and that is a very superficial and ignorant view of it which attributes it to mere social unrest .
it is not merely because the women are discontented .
it is because the women have seen visions of duty , and that is something which we not only can not resist , but , if we be true americans , we do not wish to resist .
america took its origin in visions of the human spirit , in aspirations for the deepest sort of liberty of the mind and of the heart , and as visions of that sort come up to the sight of those who are spiritually minded in america , america comes more and more into her birthright and into the perfection of her development .
so that what we have to realize in dealing with forces of this sort is that we are dealing with the substance of life itself .
i have felt as i sat here to - night the wholesome contagion of the occasion .
almost every other time that i ever visited atlantic city , i came to fight somebody .
i hardly know how to conduct myself when i have not come to fight against anybody , but with somebody .
i have come to suggest , among other things , that when the forces of nature are steadily working and the tide is rising to meet the moon , you need not be afraid that it will not come to its flood .
we feel the tide ; we rejoice in the strength of it ; and we shall not quarrel in the long run as to the method of it .
because , when you are working with masses of men and organized bodies of opinion , you have got to carry the organized body along .
the whole art and practice of government consists not in moving individuals , but in moving masses .
it is all very well to run ahead and beckon , but , after all , you have got to wait for the body to follow .
i have not come to ask you to be patient , because you have been , but i have come to congratulate you that there was a force behind you that will beyond any peradventure be triumphant , and for which you can afford a little while to wait .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 the imperial german government on the thirty - first of january announced to this government and to the governments of the other neutral nations that on and after the first day of february , the present month , it would adopt a policy with regard to the use of submarines against all shipping seeking to pass through certain designated areas of the high seas to which it is clearly my duty to call your attention .
let me remind the congress that on the eighteenth of april last , in view of the sinking on the twenty - fourth of march of the cross - channel passenger steamer sussex by a german submarine , without summons or warning , and the consequent loss of the lives of several citizens of the united states who were passengers aboard her , this government addressed a note to the imperial german government in which it made the following declaration : 
 " if it is still the purpose of the imperial government to prosecute relentless and indiscriminate warfare against vessels of commerce by the use of submarines without regard to what the government of the united states must consider the sacred and indisputable rules of international law and the universally recognized dictates of humanity , the government of the united states is at last forced to the conclusion that there is but one course it can pursue .
unless the imperial government should now immediately declare and effect an abandonment of its present methods of submarine warfare against passenger and freight - carrying vessels , the government of the united states can have no choice but to sever diplomatic relations with the german empire altogether . "
in reply to this declaration the imperial german government gave this government the following assurance : 
 " the german government is prepared to do its utmost to confine the operations of war for the rest of its duration to the fighting forces of the belligerents , thereby also insuring the freedom of the seas , a principle upon which the german government believes , now as before , to be in agreement with the government of the united states .
" the german government , guided by this idea , notifies the government of the united states that the german naval forces have received the following orders : 
 in accordance with the general principles of visit and search and destruction of merchant vessels recognized by international law , such vessels , both within and without the area declared as naval war zone , shall not be sunk without warning and without saving human lives , unless these ships attempt to escape or offer resistance .
" but , " it added , " neutrals can not expect that germany , forced to fight for her existence , shall , for the sake of neutral interest , restrict the use of an effective weapon if her enemy is permitted to continue to apply at will methods of warfare violating the rules of international law .
such a demand would be incompatible with the character of neutrality , and the german government is convinced that the government of the united states does not think of making such a demand , knowing that the government of the united states has repeatedly declared that it is determined to restore the principle of the freedom of the seas , from whatever quarter it has been violated . "
to this the government of the united states replied on the eighth of may , accepting , of course , the assurances given , but adding , 
 " the government of the united states feels it necessary to state that it takes it for granted that the imperial german government does not intend to imply that the maintenance of its newly announced policy is in any way contingent upon the course or result of diplomatic negotiations between the government of the united states and any other belligerent government , notwithstanding the fact that certain passages in the imperial government 's note of the fourth instant might appear to be susceptible of that construction .
in order , however , to avoid any possible misunderstanding , the government of the united states notifies the imperial government that it can not for a moment entertain , much less discuss , a suggestion that respect by german naval authorities for the rights of citizens of the united states upon the high seas should in any way or in the slightest degree be made contingent upon the conduct of any other government affecting the rights of neutrals and non - combatants .
responsibility in such matters is single , not joint ; absolute , not relative . "
to this note of the eighth of may the imperial german government made no reply .
on the thirty - first of january , the wednesday of the present week , the german ambassador handed to the secretary of state , along with a formal note , a memorandum which contains the following statement : 
 " the imperial government , therefore , does not doubt that the government of the united states will understand the situation thus forced upon germany by the entente - allies ' brutal methods of war and by their determination to destroy the central powers , and that the government of the united states will further realize that the now openly disclosed intentions of the entente - allies give back to germany the freedom of action which she reserved in her note addressed to the government of the united states on may 4 , 1916 .
" under these circumstances germany will meet the illegal measures of her enemies by forcibly preventing after february 1 , 1917 , in a zone around great britain , france , italy , and in the eastern mediterranean all navigation , that of neutrals included , from and to england and from and to france , etc . ,
etc .
all ships met within the zone will be sunk . "
i think that you will agree with me that , in view of this declaration , which suddenly and without prior intimation of any kind deliberately withdraws the solemn assurance given in the imperial government 's note of the fourth of may , 1916 , this government has no alternative consistent with the dignity and honor of the united states but to take the course which , in its note of the eighteenth of april , 1916 , it announced that it would take in the event that the german government did not declare and effect an abandonment of the methods of submarine warfare which it was then employing and to which it now purposes again to resort .
i have , therefore , directed the secretary of state to announce to his excellency the german ambassador that all diplomatic relations between the united states and the german empire are severed , and that the american ambassador at berlin will immediately be withdrawn ; and , in accordance with this decision , to hand to his excellency his passports .
notwithstanding this unexpected action of the german government , this sudden and deeply deplorable renunciation of its assurances , given this government at one of the most critical moments of tension in the relations of the two governments , i refuse to believe that it is the intention of the german authorities to do in fact what they have warned us they will feel at liberty to do .
i can not bring myself to believe that they will indeed pay no regard to the ancient friendship between their people and our own or to the solemn obligations which have been exchanged between them and destroy american ships and take the lives of american citizens in the willful prosecution of the ruthless naval program they have announced their intention to adopt .
only actual overt acts on their part can make me believe it even now .
if this inveterate confidence on my part in the sobriety and prudent foresight of their purpose should unhappily prove unfounded ; if american ships and american lives should in fact be sacrificed by their naval commanders in heedless contravention of the just and reasonable understandings of international law and the obvious dictates of humanity , i shall take the liberty of coming again before the congress , to ask that authority be given me to use any means that may be necessary for the protection of our seamen and our people in the prosecution of their peaceful and legitimate errands on the high seas .
i can do nothing less .
i take it for granted that all neutral governments will take the same course .
we do not desire any hostile conflict with the imperial german government .
we are the sincere friends of the german people and earnestly desire to remain at peace with the government which speaks for them .
we shall not believe that they are hostile to us unless and until we are obliged to believe it ; and we purpose nothing more than the reasonable defense of the undoubted rights of our people .
we wish to serve no selfish ends .
we seek merely to stand true alike in thought and in action to the immemorial principles of our people which i sought to express in my address to the senate only two weeks ago , -- seek merely to vindicate our right to liberty and justice and an unmolested life .
these are the bases of peace , not war .
god grant we may not be challenged to defend them by acts of wilful injustice on the part of the government of germany !

by the president of the united states of america 
 a proclamation 
 whereas , congress has enacted and the president has on the 18th day of may , 1917 , approved a law which contains the following provisions : 
 section 5 .
that all male persons between the ages of twenty - one and thirty , both inclusive , shall be subject to registration in accordance with regulations to be prescribed by the president , and upon proclamation by the president or other public notice given by him or by his direction , stating the time and place of such registration , it shall be the duty of all persons of the designated ages , except officers and enlisted men of the regular army , the navy and the national guard and naval militia while in the service of the united states , to present themselves for and submit to registration under the provisions of this act .
and every such person shall be deemed to have notice of the requirements of this act upon the publication of said proclamation or other notice as aforesaid given by the president or by his direction .
and any person who shall wilfully fail or refuse to present himself for registration or to submit thereto as herein provided , shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall , upon conviction in the district court of the united states having jurisdiction thereof , be punished by imprisonment for not more than one year , and shall thereupon be duly registered .
provided , that in the call of the docket preference shall be given , in courts trying the same , to the trial of criminal proceedings under this act .
provided , further , that persons shall be subject to registration as herein provided who shall have attained their twenty - first birthday and who shall not have attained their thirty - first birthday on or before the day set for the registration , and all persons so registered shall be and remain subject to draft into the forces hereby authorized unless exempted or excused therefrom , as in this act provided .
provided , further , that in the case of temporary absence from actual place of legal residence of any person liable to registration as provided herein , such registration may be made by mail under regulations to be prescribed by the president .
section 6 .
that the president is hereby authorized to utilize the service of any or all departments and any or all officers or agents of the united states and of the several states , territories and the district of columbia and subdivisions thereof , in the execution of this act , and all officers and agents of the united states and of the several states , territories and subdivisions thereof , and of the district of columbia , and all persons designated or appointed under regulations prescribed by the president , whether such appointments are made by the president himself or by the governor or other officer of any state or territory to perform any duty in the execution of this act , are hereby required to perform such duty as the president shall order or direct , and all such officers and agents and persons so designated or appointed shall hereby have full authority for all acts done by them in the execution of this act , by the direction of the president .
correspondence in the execution of this act may be carried in penalty envelopes bearing the frank of the war department .
any person charged , as herein provided , with the duty of carrying into effect any of the provisions of this act or the regulations made or directions given thereunder who shall fail or neglect to perform such duty , and any person charged with such duty or having and exercising any authority under said act , regulations or directions , who shall knowingly make or be a party to the making of any false or incorrect registration , physical examination , exemption , enlistment , enrolment or muster .
and any person who shall make or be a party to the making of any false statement or certificate as to the fitness or liability of himself or any other person for service under the provisions of this act , or regulations made by the president thereunder , or otherwise evades or aids another to evade the requirements of this act or of said regulations , or who , in any manner , shall fail or neglect fully to perform any duty required of him in the execution of this act , shall , if not subject to military law , be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the district court of the united states having jurisdiction thereof be punished by imprisonment for not more than one year , or , if subject to military law , shall be tried by court martial and suffer such punishment as a court martial may direct .
now , therefore , i , woodrow wilson , president of the united states , do call upon the governor of each of the several states and territories , the board of commissioners of the district of columbia and all officers and agents of the several states and territories , of the district of columbia , and of the counties and municipalities therein , to perform certain duties in the execution of the foregoing law , which duties will be communicated to them directly in regulations of even date herewith .
and i do further proclaim and give notice to all persons subject to registration in the several states and in the district of columbia , in accordance with the above law , that the time and place of such registration shall be between 7 a. m. and 7 p. m. on the 5th day of june , 1917 , at the registration place in the precinct wherein they have their permanent homes .
those who shall have attained their twenty - first birthday and who shall not have attained their thirty - first birthday on or before the day here named are required to register , excepting only officers and enlisted men of the regular army , the navy , the marine corps and the national guard and naval militia while in the service of the united states , and officers in the officers ' reserve corps and enlisted men in the enlisted reserve corps while in active service .
in the territories of alaska , hawaii and porto rico a day for registration will be named in a later proclamation .
and i do hereby charge those who , through sickness , shall be unable to present themselves for registration that they apply on or before the day of registration to the county clerk of the county where they may be for instructions as to how they may be registered by agent .
those who expect to be absent on the day named from the counties in which they have their permanent homes may register by mail , but their mailed registration cards must reach the places in which they have their permanent homes by the day named herein .
they should apply as soon as practicable to the county clerk of the county wherein they may be for instructions as to how they may accomplish their registration by mail .
in case such persons as , through sickness or absence , may be unable to present themselves personally for registration shall be sojourning in cities of over 30,000 population , they shall apply to the city clerk of the city wherein they may be sojourning rather than to the clerk of the county .
the clerks of counties and of cities of over 30,000 population , in which numerous applications from the sick and from non - residents are expected , are authorized to establish such sub - agencies and to employ and deputize such clerical force as may be necessary to accommodate these applications .
the power against which we are arrayed has sought to impose its will upon the world by force .
to this end it has increased armament until it has changed the face of war .
in the sense in which we have been wo nt to think of armies there are no armies in this struggle , there are entire nations armed .
thus , the men who remain to till the soil and man the factories are no less a part of the army that is in france than the men beneath the battle flags .
it must be so with us .
it is not an army that we must shape and train for war -- it is a nation .
to this end our people must draw close in one compact front against a common foe .
but this can not be if each man pursues a private purpose .
all must pursue one purpose .
the nation needs all men , but it needs each man , not in the field that will most pleasure him , but in the endeavor that will best serve the common good .
thus , though a sharpshooter pleases to operate a trip - hammer for the forging of great guns , and an expert machinist desires to march with the flag , the nation is being served only when the sharpshooter marches and the machinist remains at his levers .
the whole nation must be a team , in which each man shall play the part for which he is best fitted .
to this end congress has provided that the nation shall be organized for war by selection , that each man shall be classified for service in the place to which it shall best serve the general good to call him .
the significance of this can not be overstated .
it is a new thing in our history and a landmark in our progress .
it is a new manner of accepting and vitalizing our duty to give ourselves with thoughtful devotion to the common purpose of us all .
it is in no sense a conscription of the unwilling .
it is , rather , selection from a nation which has volunteered in mass .
it is no more a choosing of those who shall march with the colors than it is a selection of those who shall serve an equally necessary and devoted purpose in the industries that lie behind the battle - lines .
the day here named is the time upon which all shall present themselves for assignment to their tasks .
it is for that reason destined to be remembered as one of the most conspicuous moments in our history .
it is nothing less than the day upon which the manhood of the country shall step forward in one solid rank in defense of the ideals to which this nation is consecrated .
it is important to those ideals , no less than to the pride of this generation in manifesting its devotion to them , that there be no gaps in the ranks .
it is essential that the day be approached in thoughtful apprehension of its significance and that we accord to it the honor and the meaning that it deserves .
our industrial need prescribes that it be not made a technical holiday , but the stern sacrifice that is before us urges that it be carried in all our hearts as a great day of patriotic devotion and obligation , when the duty shall lie upon every man , whether he is himself to be registered or not , to see to it that the name of every male person of the designated ages is written on these lists of honor .
in witness whereof , i have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the united states to be affixed .
done at the city of washington this 18th day of may , in the year of our lord , 1917 , and of the independence of the united states of america the one hundred and forty - first .

i have called the congress into extraordinary session because there are serious , very serious , choices of policy to be made , and made immediately , which it was neither right nor constitutionally permissible that i should assume the responsibility of making .
on the 3rd of february last , i officially laid before you the extraordinary announcement of the imperial german government that on and after the 1st day of february it was its purpose to put aside all restraints of law or of humanity and use its submarines to sink every vessel that sought to approach either the ports of great britain and ireland or the western coasts of europe or any of the ports controlled by the enemies of germany within the mediterranean .
that had seemed to be the object of the german submarine warfare earlier in the war , but since april of last year the imperial government had somewhat restrained the commanders of its undersea craft in conformity with its promise then given to us that passenger boats should not be sunk and that due warning would be given to all other vessels which its submarines might seek to destroy , when no resistance was offered or escape attempted , and care taken that their crews were given at least a fair chance to save their lives in their open boats .
the precautions taken were meager and haphazard enough , as was proved in distressing instance after instance in the progress of the cruel and unmanly business , but a certain degree of restraint was observed .
the new policy has swept every restriction aside .
vessels of every kind , whatever their flag , their character , their cargo , their destination , their errand , have been ruthlessly sent to the bottom without warning and without thought of help or mercy for those on board , the vessels of friendly neutrals along with those of belligerents .
even hospital ships and ships carrying relief to the sorely bereaved and stricken people of belgium , though the latter were provided with safe conduct through the proscribed areas by the german government itself and were distinguished by unmistakable marks of identity , have been sunk with the same reckless lack of compassion or of principle .
i was for a little while unable to believe that such things would in fact be done by any government that had hitherto subscribed to the humane practices of civilized nations .
international law had its origin in the attempt to set up some law which would be respected and observed upon the seas , where no nation had right of dominion and where lay the free highways of the world .
by painful stage after stage has that law been built up , with meager enough results , indeed , after all was accomplished that could be accomplished , but always with a clear view , at least , of what the heart and conscience of mankind demanded .
this minimum of right the german government has swept aside under the plea of retaliation and necessity and because it had no weapons which it could use at sea except these which it is impossible to employ as it is employing them without throwing to the winds all scruples of humanity or of respect for the understandings that were supposed to underlie the intercourse of the world .
i am not now thinking of the loss of property involved , immense and serious as that is , but only of the wanton and wholesale destruction of the lives of noncombatants , men , women , and children , engaged in pursuits which have always , even in the darkest periods of modern history , been deemed innocent and legitimate .
property can be paid for ; the lives of peaceful and innocent people can not be .
the present german submarine warfare against commerce is a warfare against mankind .
it is a war against all nations .
american ships have been sunk , american lives taken in ways which it has stirred us very deeply to learn of ; but the ships and people of other neutral and friendly nations have been sunk and overwhelmed in the waters in the same way .
there has been no discrimination .
the challenge is to all mankind .
each nation must decide for itself how it will meet it .
the choice we make for ourselves must be made with a moderation of counsel and a temperateness of judgment befitting our character and our motives as a nation .
we must put excited feeling away .
our motive will not be revenge or the victorious assertion of the physical might of the nation , but only the vindication of right , of human right , of which we are only a single champion .
when i addressed the congress on the 26th of february last , i thought that it would suffice to assert our neutral rights with arms , our right to use the seas against unlawful interference , our right to keep our people safe against unlawful violence .
but armed neutrality , it now appears , is impracticable .
because submarines are in effect outlaws when used as the german submarines have been used against merchant shipping , it is impossible to defend ships against their attacks as the law of nations has assumed that merchantmen would defend themselves against privateers or cruisers , visible craft giving chase upon the open sea .
it is common prudence in such circumstances , grim necessity indeed , to endeavor to destroy them before they have shown their own intention .
they must be dealt with upon sight , if dealt with at all .
the german government denies the right of neutrals to use arms at all within the areas of the sea which it has proscribed , even in the defense of rights which no modern publicist has ever before questioned their right to defend .
the intimation is conveyed that the armed guards which we have placed on our merchant ships will be treated as beyond the pale of law and subject to be dealt with as pirates would be .
armed neutrality is ineffectual enough at best ; in such circumstances and in the face of such pretensions it is worse than ineffectual : it is likely only to produce what it was meant to prevent ; it is practically certain to draw us into the war without either the rights or the effectiveness of belligerents .
there is one choice we can not make , we are incapable of making : we will not choose the path of submission and suffer the most sacred rights of our nation and our people to be ignored or violated .
the wrongs against which we now array ourselves are no common wrongs ; they cut to the very roots of human life .
with a profound sense of the solemn and even tragical character of the step i am taking and of the grave responsibilities which it involves , but in unhesitating obedience to what i deem my constitutional duty , i advise that the congress declare the recent course of the imperial german government to be in fact nothing less than war against the government and people of the united states ; that it formally accept the status of belligerent which has thus been thrust upon it ; and that it take immediate steps , not only to put the country in a more thorough state of defense but also to exert all its power and employ all its resources to bring the government of the german empire to terms and end the war .
what this will involve is clear .
it will involve the utmost practicable cooperation in counsel and action with the governments now at war with germany and , as incident to that .
the extension to those governments of the most liberal financial credits , in order that our resources may so far as possible be added to theirs .
it will involve the organization and mobilization of all the material resources of the country to supply the materials of war and serve the incidental needs of the nation in the most abundant and yet the most economical and efficient way possible .
it will involve the immediate full equipment of the navy in all respects but particularly in supplying it with the best means of dealing with the enemy 's submarines .
it will involve the immediate addition to the armed forces of the united states already provided for by law in case of war at least 500,000 men , who should , in my opinion , be chosen upon the principle of universal liability to service , and also the authorization of subsequent additional increments of equal force so soon as they may be needed and can be handled in training .
it will involve also , of course , the granting of adequate credits to the government , sustained , i hope , so far as they can equitably be sustained by the present generation , by well - conceived taxation .
i say sustained so far as may be equitable by taxation because it seems to me that it would be most unwise to base the credits which will now be necessary entirely on money borrowed .
it is our duty , i most respectfully urge , to protect our people so far as we may against the very serious hardships and evils which would be likely to arise out of the inflation which would be produced by vast loans .
in carrying out the measures by which these things are to be accomplished , we should keep constantly in mind the wisdom of interfering as little as possible in our own preparation and in the equipment of our own military forces with the duty - for it will be a very practical duty - of supplying the nations already at war with germany with the materials which they can obtain only from us or by our assistance .
they are in the field and we should help them in every way to be effective there .
i shall take the liberty of suggesting , through the several executive departments of the government , for the consideration of your committees , measures for the accomplishment of the several objects i have mentioned .
i hope that it will be your pleasure to deal with them as having been framed after very careful thought by the branch of the government upon which the responsibility of conducting the war and safeguarding the nation will most directly fall .
while we do these things , these deeply momentous things , let us be very clear , and make very clear to all the world , what our motives and our objects are .
my own thought has not been driven from its habitual and normal course by the unhappy events of the last two months , and i do not believe that the thought of the nation has been altered or clouded by them .
i have exactly the same things in mind now that i had in mind when i addressed the senate on the 22nd of january last ; the same that i had in mind when i addressed the congress on the 3rd of february and on the 26th of february .
our object now , as then , is to vindicate the principles of peace and justice in the life of the world as against selfish and autocratic power and to set up among the really free and self - governed peoples of the world such a concert of purpose and of action as will henceforth ensure the observance of those principles .
neutrality is no longer feasible or desirable where the peace of the world is involved and the freedom of its peoples , and the menace to that peace and freedom lies in the existence of autocratic governments backed by organized force which is controlled wholly by their will , not by the will of their people .
we have seen the last of neutrality in such circumstances .
we are at the beginning of an age in which it will be insisted that the same standards of conduct and of responsibility for wrong done shall be observed among nations and their governments that are observed among the individual citizens of civilized states .
we have no quarrel with the german people .
we have no feeling toward them but one of sympathy and friendship .
it was not upon their impulse that their government acted in entering this war .
it was not with their previous knowledge or approval .
it was a war determined upon as wars used to be determined upon in the old , unhappy days when peoples were nowhere consulted by their rulers and wars were provoked and waged in the interest of dynasties or of little groups of ambitious men who were accustomed to use their fellowmen as pawns and tools .
self - governed nations do not fill their neighbor states with spies or set the course of intrigue to bring about some critical posture of affairs which will give them an opportunity to strike and make conquest .
such designs can be successfully worked out only under cover and where no one has the right to ask questions .
cunningly contrived plans of deception or aggression , carried , it may be , from generation to generation , can be worked out and kept from the light only within the privacy of courts or behind the carefully guarded confidences of a narrow and privileged class .
they are happily impossible where public opinion commands and insists upon full information concerning all the nation 's affairs .
a steadfast concert for peace can never be maintained except by a partnership of democratic nations .
no autocratic government could be trusted to keep faith within it or observe its covenants .
it must be a league of honor , a partnership of opinion .
intrigue would eat its vitals away ; the plottings of inner circles who could plan what they would and render account to no one would be a corruption seated at its very heart .
only free peoples can hold their purpose and their honor steady to a common end and prefer the interests of mankind to any narrow interest of their own .
does not every american feel that assurance has been added to our hope for the future peace of the world by the wonderful and heartening things that have been happening within the last few weeks in russia ?
russia was known by those who knew it best to have been always in fact democratic at heart , in all the vital habits of her thought , in all the intimate relationships of her people that spoke their natural instinct , their habitual attitude toward life .
the autocracy that crowned the summit of her political structure , long as it had stood and terrible as was the reality of its power , was not in fact russian in origin , character , or purpose ; and now it has been shaken off and the great , generous russian people have been added in all their naive majesty and might to the forces that are fighting for freedom in the world , for justice , and for peace .
here is a fit partner for a league of honor .
one of the things that has served to convince us that the prussian autocracy was not and could never be our friend is that from the very outset of the present war it has filled our unsuspecting communities and even our offices of government with spies and set criminal intrigues everywhere afoot against our national unity of counsel , our peace within and without , our industries and our commerce .
indeed , it is now evident that its spies were here even before the war began ; and it is unhappily not a matter of conjecture but a fact proved in our courts of justice that the intrigues which have more than once come perilously near to disturbing the peace and dislocating the industries of the country have been carried on at the instigation , with the support , and even under the personal direction of official agents of the imperial government accredited to the government of the united states .
even in checking these things and trying to extirpate them , we have sought to put the most generous interpretation possible upon them because we knew that their source lay , not in any hostile feeling or purpose of the german people toward us ( who were no doubt as ignorant of them as we ourselves were ) but only in the selfish designs of a government that did what it pleased and told its people nothing .
but they have played their part in serving to convince us at last that that government entertains no real friendship for us and means to act against our peace and security at its convenience .
that it means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors the intercepted note to the german minister at mexico city is eloquent evidence .
we are accepting this challenge of hostile purpose because we know that in such a government , following such methods , we can never have a friend ; and that in the presence of its organized power , always lying in wait to accomplish we know not what purpose , there can be no assured security for the democratic governments of the world .
we are now about to acceptgaugeof battle with this natural foe to liberty and shall , if necessary , spend the whole force of the nation to check and nullify its pretensions and its power .
we are glad , now that we see the facts with no veil of false pretense about them , to fight thus for the ultimate peace of the world and for the liberation of its peoples , the german peoples included : for the rights of nations great and small and the privilege of men everywhere to choose their way of life and of obedience .
the world must be made safe for democracy .
its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty .
we have no selfish ends to serve .
we desire no conquest , no dominion .
we seek no indemnities for ourselves , no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make .
we are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind .
we shall be satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith and the freedom of nations can make them .
just because we fight without rancor and without selfish object , seeking nothing for ourselves but what we shall wish to share with all free peoples , we shall , i feel confident , conduct our operations as belligerents without passion and ourselves observe with proud punctilio the principles of right and of fair play we profess to be fighting for .
i have said nothing of the governments allied with the imperial government of germany because they have not made war upon us or challenged us to defend our right and our honor .
the austro - hungarian government has , indeed , avowed its unqualified endorsement and acceptance of the reckless and lawless submarine warfare adopted now without disguise by the imperial german government , and it has therefore not been possible for this government to receive count tarnowski , the ambassador recently accredited to this government by the imperial and royal government of austria - hungary ; but that government has not actually engaged in warfare against citizens of the united states on the seas , and i take the liberty , for the present at least , of postponing a discussion of our relations with the authorities at vienna .
we enter this war only where we are clearly forced into it because there are no other means of defending our rights .
it will be all the easier for us to conduct ourselves as belligerents in a high spirit of right and fairness because we act without animus , not in enmity toward a people or with the desire to bring any injury or disadvantage upon them , but only in armed opposition to an irresponsible government which has thrown aside all considerations of humanity and of right and is running amuck .
we are , let me say again , the sincere friends of the german people , and shall desire nothing so much as the early reestablishment of intimate relations of mutual advantage between us - however hard it may be for them , for the time being , to believe that this is spoken from our hearts .
we have borne with their present government through all these bitter months because of that friendship - exercising a patience and forbearance which would otherwise have been impossible .
we shall , happily , still have an opportunity to prove that friendship in our daily attitude and actions toward the millions of men and women of german birth and native sympathy who live among us and share our life , and we shall be proud to prove it toward all who are in fact loyal to their neighbors and to the government in the hour of test .
they are , most of them , as true and loyal americans as if they had never known any other fealty or allegiance .
they will be prompt to stand with us in rebuking and restraining the few who may be of a different mind and purpose .
if there should be disloyalty , it will be dealt with with a firm hand of stern repression ; but , if it lifts its head at all , it will lift it only here and there and without countenance except from a lawless and malignant few .
it is a distressing and oppressive duty , gentlemen of the congress , which i have performed in thus addressing you .
there are , it may be , many months of fiery trial and sacrifice ahead of us .
it is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war , into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars , civilization itself seeming to be in the balance .
but the right is more precious than peace , and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts - for democracy , for the right of those who submit to authority to have a voice in their own governments , for the rights and liberties of small nations , for a universal dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free .
to such a task we can dedicate our lives and our fortunes , everything that we are and everything that we have , with the pride of those who know that the day has come when america is privileged to spend her blood and her might for the principles that gave her birth and happiness and the peace which she has treasured .
god helping her , she can do no other .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 the year that has elapsed since i last stood before you to fulfil my constitutional duty to give to the congress from time to time information on the state of the union has been so crowded with great events , great processes , and great results that i can not hope to give you an adequate picture of its transactions or of the far - reaching changes which have been wrought of our nation and of the world .
you have yourselves witnessed these things , as i have .
it is too soon to assess them ; and we who stand in the midst of them and are part of them are less qualified than men of another generation will be to say what they mean , or even what they have been .
but some great outstanding facts are unmistakable and constitute , in a sense , part of the public business with which it is our duty to deal .
to state them is to set the stage for the legislative and executive action which must grow out of them and which we have yet to shape and determine .
a year ago we had sent 145,918 men overseas .
since then we have sent 1,950,513 , an average of 162,542 each month , the number in fact rising , in may last , to 245,951 , in june to 278,760 , in july to 307,182 , and continuing to reach similar figures in august and september , in august 289,570 and in september 257,438 .
no such movement of troops ever took place before , across three thousand miles of sea , followed by adequate equipment and supplies , and carried safely through extraordinary dangers of attack ,- dangers which were alike strange and infinitely difficult to guard against .
in all this movement only seven hundred and fifty - eight men were lost by enemy attack , six hundred and thirty of whom were upon a single english transport which was sunk near the orkney islands .
i need not tell you what lay back of this great movement of men and material .
it is not invidious to say that back of it lay a supporting organization of the industries of the country and of all its productive activities more complete , more thorough in method and effective in result , more spirited and unanimous in purpose and effort than any other great belligerent had been able to effect .
we profited greatly by the experience of the nations which had already been engaged for nearly three years in the exigent and exacting business , their every resource and every executive proficiency taxed to the utmost .
we were their pupils .
but we learned quickly and acted with a promptness and a readiness of cooperation that justify our great pride that we were able to serve the world with unparalleled energy and quick accomplishment .
but it is not the physical scale and executive efficiency of preparation , supply , equipment and despatch that i would dwell upon , but the mettle and quality of the officers and men we sent over and of the sailors who kept the seas , and the spirit of the nation that stood behind them .
no soldiers or sailors ever proved themselves more quickly ready for the test of battle or acquitted themselves with more splendid courage and achievement when put to the test .
those of us who played some part in directing the great processes by which the war was pushed irresistibly forward to the final triumph may now forget all that and delight our thoughts with the story of what our men did .
their officers understood the grim and exacting task they had undertaken and performed it with an audacity , efficiency , and unhesitating courage that touch the story of convoy and battle with imperishable distinction at every turn , whether the enterprise were great or small , -from their great chiefs , pershing and sims , down to the youngest lieutenant ; and their men were worthy of them ,- such men as hardly need to be commanded , and go to their terrible adventure blithely and with the quick intelligence of those who know just what it is they would accomplish .
i am proud to be the fellowcountryman of men of such stuff and valor .
those of us who stayed at home did our duty ; the war could not have been won or the gallant men who fought it given their opportunity to win it otherwise ; but for many a long day we shall think ourselves " accurs'd we were not there , and hold our manhoods cheap while any speaks that fought " with these at st. mihiel or thierry .
the memory of those days of triumphant battle will go with these fortunate men to their graves ; and each will have his favorite memory . "
old men forget ; yet all shall be forgot , but he 'll remember with advantages what feats he did that day ! "
what we all thank god for with deepest gratitude is that our men went in force into the line of battle just at the critical moment when the whole fate of the world seemed to hang in the balance and threw their fresh strength into the ranks of freedom in time to turn the whole tide and sweep of the fateful struggle ,- turn it once for all , so that thenceforth it was back , back , back for their enemies , always back , never again forward !
after that it was only a scant four months before the commanders of the central empires knew themselves beaten ; and now their very empires are in liquidation !
and throughout it all how fine the spirit of the nation was : what unity of purpose , what untiring zeal !
what elevation of purpose ran through all its splendid display of strength , its untiring accomplishment !
i have said that those of us who stayed at home to do the work of organization and supply will always wish that we had been with the men whom we sustained by our labor ; but we can never be ashamed .
it has been an inspiring thing to be here in the midst of fine men who had turned aside from every private interest of their own and devoted the whole of their trained capacity to the tasks that supplied the sinews of the whole great undertaking !
the patriotism , the unselfishness , the thoroughgoing devotion and distinguished capacity that marked their toilsome labors , day after day , month after month , have made them fit mates and comrades of the men in the trenches and on the sea .
and not the men here in washington only .
they have but directed the vast achievement .
throughout innumerable factories , upon innumerable farms , in the depths of coal mines and iron mines and copper mines , wherever the stuffs of industry were to be obtained and prepared , in the shipyards , on the railways , at the docks , on the sea , in every labor that was needed to sustain the battle lines , men have vied with each other to do their part and do it well .
they can look any man - at - arms in the face , and say , we also strove to win and gave the best that was in us to make our fleets and armies sure of their triumph !
and what shall we say of the women ,- of their instant intelligence , quickening every task that they touched ; their capacity for organization and cooperation , which gave their action discipline and enhanced the effectiveness of everything they attempted ; their aptitude at tasks to which they had .
never before set their hands ; their utter selfsacrifice alike in what they did and in what they gave ?
their contribution to the great result is beyond appraisal .
they have added a new lustre to the annals of american womanhood .
the least tribute we can pay them is to make them the equals of men in political rights as they have proved themselves their equals in every field of practical work they have entered , whether for themselves or for their country .
these great days of completed achievement would be sadly marred were we to omit that act of justice .
besides the immense practical services they have rendered the women of the country have been the moving spirits in the systematic economies by which our people have voluntarily assisted to supply the suffering peoples of the world and the armies upon every front with food and everything else that we had that might serve the common cause .
the details of such a story can never be fully written , but we carry them at our hearts and thank god that we can say that we are the kinsmen of such .
and now we are sure of the great triumph for which every sacrifice was made .
it has come , come in its completeness , and with the pride and inspiration of these days of achievement quick within us , we turn to the tasks of peace again ,- a peace secure against the violence of irresponsible monarchs and ambitious military coteries and made ready for a new order , for new foundations of justice and fair dealing .
we are about to give order and organization to this peace not only for ourselves but for the other peoples of the world as well , so far as they will suffer us to serve them .
it is international justice that we seek , not domestic safety merely .
our thoughts have dwelt of late upon europe , upon asia , upon the near and the far east , very little upon the acts of peace and accommodation that wait to be performed at our own doors .
while we are adjusting our relations with the rest of the world is it not of capital importance that we should clear away all grounds of misunderstanding with our immediate neighbors and give proof of the friendship we really feel ?
i hope that the members of the senate will permit me to speak once more of the unratified treaty of friendship and adjustment with the republic of colombia .
i very earnestly urge upon them an early and favorable action upon that vital matter .
i believe that they will feel , with me , that the stage of affairs is now set for such action as will be not only just but generous and in the spirit of the new age upon which we have so happily entered .
so far as our domestic affairs are concerned the problem of our return to peace is a problem of economic and industrial readjustment .
that problem is less serious for us than it may turn out too he for the nations which have suffered the disarrangements and the losses of war longer than we .
our people , moreover , do not wait to be coached and led .
they know their own business , are quick and resourceful at every readjustment , definite in purpose , and self - reliant in action .
any leading strings we might seek to put them in would speedily become hopelessly tangled because they would pay no attention to them and go their own way .
all that we can do as their legislative and executive servants is to mediate the process of change here , there , and elsewhere as we may .
i have heard much counsel as to the plans that should be formed and personally conducted to a happy consummation , but from no quarter have i seen any general scheme of " reconstruction " emerge which i thought it likely we could force our spirited business men and self - reliant laborers to accept with due pliancy and obedience .
while the war lasted we set up many agencies by which to direct the industries of the country in the services it was necessary for them to render , by which to make sure of an abundant supply of the materials needed , by which to check undertakings that could for the time be dispensed with and stimulate those that were most serviceable in war , by which to gain for the purchasing departments of the government a certain control over the prices of essential articles and materials , by which to restrain trade with alien enemies , make the most of the available shipping , and systematize financial transactions , both public and private , so that there would be no unnecessary conflict or confusion ,- by which , in short , to put every material energy of the country in harness to draw -the common load and make of us one team in the accomplishment of a great task .
but the moment we knew the armistice to have been signed we took the harness off .
raw materials upon which the government had kept its hand for fear there should not be enough for the industries that supplied the armies have been released and put into the general market again .
great industrial plants whose whole output and machinery had been taken over for the uses of the government have been set free to return to the uses to which they were put before the war .
it has not been possible to remove so readily or so quickly the control of foodstuffs and of shipping , because the world has still to be fed from our granaries and the ships are still needed to send supplies to our men overseas and to bring the men back as fast as the disturbed conditions on the other side of the water permit ; but even there restraints are being relaxed as much as possible and more and more as the weeks go by 
 never before have there been agencies in existence in this country which knew so much of the field of supply , of labor , and of industry as the war industries board , the war trade board , the labor department , the food administration , and the fuel administration have known since their labors became thoroughly systematized ; and they have not been isolated agencies ; they have been directed by men who represented the permanent departments of the government and so have been the centres of unified and cooperative action .
it has been the policy of the executive , therefore , since the armistice was assured ( which is in effect a complete submission of the enemy ) to put the knowledge of these bodies at the disposal of the business men of the country and to offer their intelligent mediation at every point and in every matter where it was desired .
it is surprising how fast the process of return to a peace footing has moved in the three weeks since the fighting stopped .
it promises to outrun any inquiry that may be instituted and any aid that may be offered .
it will not be easy to direct it any better than it will direct itself .
the american business man is of quick initiative .
the ordinary and normal processes of private initiative will not , however , provide immediate employment for all of the men of our returning armies .
those who are of trained capacity , those who are skilled workmen , those who have acquired familiarity with established businesses , those who are ready and willing to go to the farms , all those whose aptitudes are known or will be sought out by employers will find no difficulty , it is safe to say , in finding place and employment .
but there will be others who will be at a loss where to gain a livelihood unless pains are taken to guide them and put them in the way of work .
there will be a large floating residuum of labor which should not be left wholly to shift for itself .
it seems to me important , therefore , that the development of public works of every sort should be promptly resumed , in order that opportunities should be created for unskilled labor in particular , and that plans should be made for such developments of our unused lands and our natural resources as we have hitherto lacked stirnulation to undertake .
i particularly direct your attention to the very practical plans which the secretary of the interior has developed in his annual report and before your committees for the reclamation of arid , swamp , and cutover lands which might , if the states were willing and able to cooperate , redeem some three hundred million acres of land for cultivation .
there are said to be fifteen or twenty million acres of land in the west , at present arid , for whose reclamation water is available , if properly conserved .
there are about two hundred and thirty million acres from which the forests have been cut but which have never yet been cleared for the plow and which lie waste and desolate .
these lie scattered all over the union .
and there are nearly eighty million acres of land that lie under swamps or subject to periodical overflow or too wet for anything but grazing , which it is perfectly feasible to drain and protect and redeem .
the congress can at once direct thousands of the returning soldiers to the reclamation of the arid lands which it has already undertaken , if it will but enlarge the plans and appropriations which it has entrusted to the department of the interior .
it is possible in dealing with our unused land to effect a great rural and agricultural development which will afford the best sort of opportunity to men who want to help themselves ' and the secretary of the interior has thought the possible methods out in a way which is worthy of your most friendly attention .
i have spoken of the control which must yet for a while , perhaps for a long long while , be exercised over shipping because of the priority of service to which our forces overseas are entitled and which should also be accorded the shipments which are to save recently liberated peoples from starvation and many devasted regions from permanent ruin .
may i not say a special word about the needs of belgium and northern france ?
no sums of money paid by way of indemnity will serve of themselves to save them from hopeless disadvantage for years to come .
something more must be done than merely find the money .
if they had money and raw materials in abundance to - morrow they could not resume their place in the industry of the world to - morrow ,- the very important place they held before the flame of war swept across them .
many of their factories are razed to the ground .
much of their machinery is destroyed or has been taken away .
their people are scattered and many of their best workmen are dead .
their markets will be taken by others , if they are not in some special way assisted to rebuild their factories and replace their lost instruments of manufacture .
they should not be left to the vicissitudes of the sharp competition for materials and for industrial facilities which is now to set in .
i hope , therefore , that the congress will not be unwilling , if it should become necessary , to grant to some such agency as the war trade board the right to establish priorities of export and supply for the benefit of these people whom we have been so happy to assist in saving from the german terror and whom we must not now thoughtlessly leave to shift for themselves in a pitiless competitive market .
for the steadying , and facilitation of our own domestic business readjustments nothing is more important than the immediate determination of the taxes that are to be levied for 1918 , 1919 , and 1920 .
as much of the burden of taxation must be lifted from business as sound methods of financing the government will permit , and those who conduct the great essential industries of the country must be told as exactly as possible what obligations to the government they will be expected to meet in the years immediately ahead of them .
it will be of serious consequence to the country to delay removing all uncertainties in this matter a single day longer than the right processes of debate justify .
it is idle to talk of successful and confident business reconstruction before those uncertainties are resolved .
if the war had continued it would have been necessary to raise at least eight billion dollars by taxation payable in the year 1919 ; but the war has ended and i agree with the secretary of the treasury that it will be safe to reduce the amount to six billions .
an immediate rapid decline in the expenses of the government is not to be looked for .
contracts made for war supplies will , indeed , be rapidly cancelled and liquidated , but their immediate liquidation will make heavy drains on the treasury for the months just ahead of us .
the maintenance of our forces on the other side of the sea is still necessary .
a considerable proportion of those forces must remain in europe during the period of occupation , and those which are brought home will be transported and demobilized at heavy expense for months to come .
the interest on our war debt must of course be paid and provision made for the retirement of the obligations of the government which represent it .
but these demands will of course fall much below what a continuation of military operations would have entailed and six billions should suffice to supply a sound foundation for the financial operations of the year .
i entirely concur with the secretary of the treasury in recommending that the two billions needed in addition to the four billions provided by existing law be obtained from the profits which have accrued and shall accrue from war contracts and distinctively war business , but that these taxes be confined to the war profits accruing in 1918 , or in 1919 from business originating in war contracts .
i urge your acceptance of his recommendation that provision be made now , not subsequently , that the taxes to be paid in 1920 should be reduced from six to four billions .
any arrangements less definite than these would add elements of doubt and confusion to the critical period of industrial readjustment through which the country must now immediately pass , and which no true friend of the nation 's essential business interests can afford to be responsible for creating or prolonging .
clearly determined conditions , clearly and simply charted , are indispensable to the economic revival and rapid industrial development which may confidently be expected if we act now andsweep all interrogation points away .
i take it for granted that the congress will carry out the naval programme which was undertaken before we entered the war .
the secretary of the navy has submitted to your committees for authorization that part of the programme which covers the building plans of the next three years .
these plans have been prepared along the lines and in accordance with the policy which the congress established , not under the exceptional conditions of the war , but with the intention of adhering to a definite method of development for the navy .
i earnestly recommend the uninterrupted pursuit of that policy .
it would clearly be unwise for us to attempt to adjust our programmes to a future world policy as yet undetermined .
the question which causes me the greatest concern is the question of the policy to be adopted towards the railroads .
i frankly turn to you for counsel upon it .
i have no confident judgment of my own .
i do not see how any thoughtful man can have who knows anything of the complexity of the problem .
it is a problem which must be studied , studied immediately , and studied without bias or prejudice .
nothing can be gained by becoming partisans of any particular plan of settlement .
it was necessary that the administration of the railways should be taken over by the government so long as the war lasted .
it would have been impossible otherwise to establish and carry through under a single direction the necessary priorities of shipment .
it would have been impossible otherwise to combine maximum production at the factories and mines and farms with the maximum possible car supply to take the products to the ports and markets ; impossible to route troop shipments and freight shipments without regard to the advantage or - disadvantage of the roads employed ; impossible to subordinate , when necessary , all questions of convenience to the public necessity ; impossible to give the necessary financial support to the roads from the public treasury .
but all these necessities have now been served , and the question is , what is best for the railroads and for the public in the future ?
exceptional circumstances and exceptional methods of administration were not needed to convince us that the railroads were not equal to the immense tasks of transportation imposed upon them by the rapid and continuous development of the industries of the country .
we knew that already .
and we knew that they were unequal to it partly because their full cooperation was rendered impossible by law and their competition made obligatory , so that it has been impossible to assign to them severally the traffic which could best be carried by their respective lines in the interest of expedition and national economy .
we may hope , i believe , for the formal conclusion of the war by treaty by the time spring has come .
the twentyone months to which the present control of the railways is limited after formal proclamation of peace shall have been made will run at the farthest , i take it for granted , only to the january of 1921 .
the full equipment of the railways which the federal administration had planned could not be completed within any such period .
the present law does not permit the use of the revenues of the several roads for the execution of such plans except by formal contract with their directors , some of whom will consent while some will not , and therefore does not afford sufficient authority to undertake improvements upon the scale upon which it would be necessary to undertake them .
every approach to this difficult subject - matter of decision brings us face to face , therefore , with this unanswered question : what is it right that we should do with the railroads , in the interest of the public and in fairness to their owners ?
let me say at once that i have no answer ready .
the only thing that is perfectly clear to me is that it is not fair either to the public or to the owners of the railroads to leave the question unanswered and that it will presently become my duty to relinquish control of the roads , even before the expiration of the statutory period , unless there should appear some clear prospect in the meantime of a legislative solution .
their release would at least produce one element of a solution , namely certainty and a quick stimulation of private initiative .
i believe that it will be serviceable for me to set forth as explicitly as possible the alternative courses that lie open to our choice .
we can simply release the roads and go back to the old conditions of private management , unrestricted competition , and multiform regulation by both state and federal authorities ; or we can go to the opposite extreme and establish complete government control , accompanied , if necessary , by actual government ownership ; or we can adopt an intermediate course of modified private control , under a more unified and affirmative public regulation and under such alterations of the law as will permit wasteful competition to be avoided and a considerable degree of unification of administration to be effected , as , for example , by regional corporations under which the railways of definable areas would be in effect combined in single systems .
the one conclusion that i am ready to state with confidence is that it would be a disservice alike to the country and to the owners of the railroads to return to the old conditions unmodified .
those are conditions of restraint without development .
there is nothing affirmative or helpful about them .
what the country chiefly needs is that all its means of transportation should be developed , its railways , its waterways , its highways , and its countryside roads .
some new element of policy , therefore , is absolutely necessary -- necessary for the service of the public , necessary for the release of credit to those who are administering the railways , necessary for the protection of their security holders .
the old policy may be changed much or little , but surely it can not wisely be left as it was .
i hope that the congress will have a complete and impartial study of the whole problem instituted at once and prosecuted as rapidly as possible .
i stand ready and anxious to release the roads from the present control and i must do so at a very early date if by waiting until the statutory limit of time is reached i shall be merely prolonging the period of doubt and uncertainty which is hurtful to every interest concerned .
i welcome this occasion to announce to the congress my purpose to join in paris the representatives of the governments with which we have been associated in the war against the central empires for the purpose of discussing with them the main features of the treaty of peace .
i realize the great inconveniences that will attend my leaving the country , particularly at this time , but the conclusion that it was my paramount duty to go has been forced upon me by considerations which i hope will seem as conclusive to you as they have seemed to me .
the allied governments have accepted the bases of peace which i outlined to the congress on the eighth of january last , as the central empires also have , and very reasonably desire my personal counsel in their interpretation and application , and it is highly desirable that i should give it in order that the sincere desire of our government to contribute without selfish purpose of any kind to settlements that will be of common benefit to all the nations concerned may be made fully manifest .
the peace settlements which are now to be agreed upon are of transcendent importance both to us and to the rest of the world , and i know of no business or interest which should take precedence of them .
the gallant men of our armed forces on land and sea have consciously fought for the ideals which they knew to be the ideals of their country ; i have sought to express those ideals ; they have accepted my statements of them as the substance of their own thought and purpose , as the associated governments have accepted them ; i owe it to them to see to it , so far as in me lies , that no false or mistaken interpretation is put upon them , and no possible effort omitted to realize them .
it is now my duty to play my full part in making good what they offered their life 's blood to obtain .
i can think of no call to service which could transcend this .
i shall be in close touch with you and with affairs on this side the water , and you will know all that i do .
at my request , the french and english governments have absolutely removed the censorship of cable news which until within a fortnight they had maintained and there is now no censorship whatever exercised at this end except upon attempted trade communications with enemy countries .
it has been necessary to keep an open wire constantly available between paris and the department of state and another between france and the department of war .
in order that this might be done with the least possible interference with the other uses of the cables , i have temporarily taken over the control of both cables in order that they may be used as a single system .
i did so at the advice of the most experienced cable officials , and i hope that the results will justify my hope that the news of the next few months may pass with the utmost freedom and with the least possible delay from each side of the sea to the other .
may i not hope , gentlemen of the congress , that in the delicate tasks i shall have to perform on the other side of the sea , in my efforts truly and faithfully to interpret the principles and purposes of the country we love , i may have the encouragement and the added strength of your united support ?
i realize the magnitude and difficulty of the duty i am undertaking ; i am poignantly aware of its grave responsibilities .
i am the servant of the nation .
i can have no private thought or purpose of my own in performing such an errand .
i go to give the best that is in me to the common settlements which i must now assist in arriving at in conference with the other working heads of the associated governments .
i shall count upon your friendly countenance and encouragement .
i shall not be inaccessible .
the cables and the wireless will render me available for any counsel or service you may desire of me , and i shall be happy in the thought that i am constantly in touch with the weighty matters of domestic policy with which we shall have to deal .
i shall make my absence as brief as possible and shall hope to return with the happy assurance that it has been possible to translate into action the great ideals for which america has striven .

friends and fellow citizens : 
 i need not tell you what the battle of gettysburg meant .
these gallant men in blue and gray sit all about us here .
many of them met upon this ground in grim and deadly struggle .
upon these famous fields and hillsides their comrades died about them .
in their presence it were an impertinence to discourse upon how the battle went , how it ended , what it signified !
but fifty years have gone by since then , and i crave the privilege of speaking to you for a few minutes of what those fifty years have meant .
what have they meant ?
they have meant peace and union and vigor , and the maturity and might of a great nation .
how wholesome and healing the peace has been !
we have found one another again as brothers and comrades in arms , enemies no longer , generous friends rather , our battles long past , the quarrel forgotten?except that we shall not forget the splendid valor , the manly devotion of the men then arrayed against one another , now grasping hands and smiling into each other 's eyes .
how complete the union has become and how dear to all of us , how unquestioned , how benign and majestic , as state after state has been added to this our great family of free men !
how handsome the vigor , the maturity , the might of the great nation we love with undivided hearts ; how full of large and confident promise that a life will be wrought out that will crown its strength with gracious justice and with a happy welfare that will touch all alike with deep contentment !
we are debtors to those fifty crowded years ; they have made us heirs to a mighty heritage .
but do we deem the nation complete and finished ?
these venerable men crowding here to this famous field have set us a great example of devotion and utter sacrifice .
they were willing to die that the people might live .
but their task is done .
their day is turned into evening .
they look to us to perfect what they established .
their work is handed on to us , to be done in another way , but not in another spirit .
our day is not over ; it is upon us in full tide .
have affairs paused ?
does the nation stand still ?
is what the fifty years have wrought since those days of battle finished , rounded out , and completed ?
here is a great people , great with every force that has ever beaten in the lifeblood of mankind .
and it is secure .
there is no one within its borders , there is no power among the nations of the earth , to make it afraid .
but has it yet squared itself with its own great standards set up at its birth , when it made that first noble , naive appeal to the moral judgment of mankind to take notice that a government had now at last been established which was to serve men , not masters ?
it is secure in everything except the satisfaction that its life is right , adjusted to the uttermost to the standards of righteousness and humanity .
the days of sacrifice and cleansing are not closed .
we have harder things to do than were done in the heroic days of war , because harder to see clearly , requiring more vision , more calm balance of judgment , a more candid searching of the very springs of right .
look around you upon the field of gettysburg !
picture the array , the fierce heats and agony of battle , column hurled against column , battery bellowing to battery !
valor ?
yes !
greater no man shall see in war ; and self - sacrifice , and loss to the uttermost ; the high recklessness of exalted devotion which does not count the cost .
we are made by these tragic , epic things to know what it costs to make a nation?the blood and sacrifice of multitudes of unknown men lifted to a great stature in the view of all generations by knowing no limit to their manly willingness to serve .
in armies thus marshaled from the ranks of free men you will see , as it were , a nation embattled , the leaders and the led , and may know , if you will , how little except in form its action differs in days of peace from its action in days of war .
may we break camp now and be at ease ?
are the forces that fight for the nation dispersed , disbanded , gone to their homes forgetful of the common cause ?
are our forces disorganized , without constituted leaders and the might of men consciously united because we contend , not with armies , but with principalities and powers and wickedness in high places ?
are we content to lie still ?
does our union mean sympathy , our peace contentment , our vigor right action , our maturity self - comprehension and a clear confidence in choosing what we shall do ?
war fitted us for action , and action never ceases .
i have been chosen the leader of the nation .
i can not justify the choice by any qualities of my own , but so it has come about , and here i stand .
whom do i command ?
the ghostly hosts who fought upon these battlefields long ago and are gone ?
these gallant gentlemen stricken in years whose fighting days , are over , their glory won ?
what are the orders for them , and who rallies them ?
i have in my mind another host , whom these set free of civil strife in order that they might work out in days of peace and settled order the life of a great nation .
that host is the people themselves , the great and the small , without class or difference of kind or race or origin ; and undivided in interest , if we have but the vision to guide and direct them and order their lives aright in what we do .
our constitutions are their articles of enlistment .
the orders of the day are the laws upon our statute books .
what we strive for is their freedom , their right to lift themselves from day to day and behold the things they have hoped for , and so make way for still better days for those whom they love who are to come after them .
the recruits are the little children crowding in .
the quartermaster 's stores are in the mines and forests and fields , in the shops and factories .
every day something must be done to push the campaign forward ; and it must be done by plan and with an eye to some great destiny .
how shall we hold such thoughts in our hearts and not be moved ?
i would not have you live even to - day wholly in the past , but would wish to stand with you in the light that streams upon us now out of that great day gone by .
here is the nation god has builded by our hands .
what shall we do with it ?
who stands ready to act again and always in the spirit of this day of reunion and hope and patriotic fervor ?
the day of our country 's life has but broadened into morning .
do not put uniforms by .
put the harness of the present on .
lift your eyes to the great tracts of life yet to be conquered in the interest of righteous peace , of that prosperity which lies in a people 's hearts and outlasts all wars and errors of men .
come , let us be comrades and soldiers yet to serve our fellow - men in quiet counsel , where the blare of trumpets is neither heard nor heeded and where the things are done which make blessed the nations of the world in peace and righteousness and love .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 in fulfilling at this time the duty laid upon me by the constitution of communicating to you from time to time information of the state of the union and recommending to your consideration such legislative measures as may be judged necessary and expedient , i shall continue the practice , which i hope has been acceptable to you , of leaving to the reports of the several heads of the executive departments the elaboration of the detailed needs of the public service and confine myself to those matters of more general public policy with which it seems necessary and feasible to deal at the present session of the congress .
i realize the limitations of time under which you will necessarily act at this session and shall make my suggestions as few as possible ; but there were some things left undone at the last session which there will now be time to complete and which it seems necessary in the interest of the public to do at once .
in the first place , it seems to me imperatively necessary that the earliest possible consideration and action should be accorded the remaining measures of the program of settlement and regulation which i had occasion to recommend to you at the close of your last session in view of the public dangers disclosed by the unaccommodated difficulties which then existed , and which still unhappily continue to exist , between the railroads of the country and their locomotive engineers , conductors and trainmen .
i then recommended : 
 first , immediate provision for the enlargement and administrative reorganization of the interstate commerce commission along the lines embodied in the bill recently passed by the house of representatives and now awaiting action by the senate ; in order that the commission may be enabled to deal with the many great and various duties now devolving upon it with a promptness and thoroughness which are , with its present constitution and means of action , practically impossible .
second , the establishment of an eight - hour day as the legal basis alike of work and wages in the employment of all railway employes who are actually engaged in the work of operating trains in interstate transportation .
third , the authorization of the appointment by the president of a small body of men to observe actual results in experience of the adoption of the eight - hour day in railway transportation alike for the men and for the railroads .
fourth , explicit approval by the congress of the consideration by the interstate commerce commission of an increase of freight rates to meet such additional expenditures by the railroads as may have been rendered necessary by the adoption of the eight - hour day and which have not been offset by administrative readjustments and economies , should the facts disclosed justify the increase .
fifth , an amendment of the existing federal statute which provides for the mediation , conciliation and arbitration of such controversies as the present by adding to it a provision that , in case the methods of accommodation now provided for should fail , a full public investigation of the merits of every such dispute shall be instituted and completed before a strike or lockout may lawfully be attempted .
and , sixth , the lodgment in the hands of the executive of the power , in case of military necessity , to take control of such portions and such rolling stock of the railways of the country as may be required for military use and to operate them for military purposes , with authority to draft into the military service of the united states such train crews and administrative officials as the circumstances require for their safe and efficient use .
the second and third of these recommendations the congress immediately acted on : it established the eight - hour day as the legal basis of work and wages in train service and it authorized the appointment of a commission to observe and report upon the practical results , deeming these the measures most immediately needed ; but it postponed action upon the other suggestions until an opportunity should be offered for a more deliberate consideration of them .
the fourth recommendation i do not deem it necessary to renew .
the power of the interstate commerce commission to grant an increase of rates on the ground referred to is indisputably clear and a recommendation by the congress with regard to such a matter might seem to draw in question the scope of the commission 's authority or its inclination to do justice when there is no reason to doubt either .
the other suggestions - the increase in the interstate commerce commission 's membership and in its facilities for performing its manifold duties ; the provision for full public investigation and assessment of industrial disputes , and the grant to the executive of the power to control and operate the railways when necessary in time of war or other like public necessity - i now very earnestly renew .
the necessity for such legislation is manifest and pressing .
those who have entrusted us with the responsibility and duty of serving and safeguarding them in such matters would find it hard , i believe , to excuse a failure to act upon these grave matters or any unnecessary postponement of action upon them .
not only does the interstate commerce commission now find it practically impossible , with its present membership and organization , to perform its great functions promptly and thoroughly , but it is not unlikely that it may presently be found advisable to add to its duties still others equally heavy and exacting .
it must first be perfected as an administrative instrument .
the country can not and should not consent to remain any longer exposed to profound industrial disturbances for lack of additional means of arbitration and conciliation which the congress can easily and promptly supply .
and all will agree that there must be no doubt as to the power of the executive to make immediate and uninterrupted use of the railroads for the concentration of the military forces of the nation wherever they are needed and whenever they are needed .
this is a program of regulation , prevention and administrative efficiency which argues its own case in the mere statement of it .
with regard to one of its items , the increase in the efficiency of the interstate commerce commission , the house of representatives has already acted ; its action needs only the concurrence of the senate .
i would hesitate to recommend , and i dare say the congress would hesitate to act upon the suggestion should i make it , that any man in any i occupation should be obliged by law to continue in an employment which he desired to leave .
to pass a law which forbade or prevented the individual workman to leave his work before receiving the approval of society in doing so would be to adopt a new principle into our jurisprudence , which i take it for granted we are not prepared to introduce .
but the proposal that the operation of the railways of the country shall not be stopped or interrupted by the concerted action of organized bodies of men until a public investigation shall have been instituted , which shall make the whole question at issue plain for the judgment of the opinion of the nation , is not to propose any such principle .
it is based upon the very different principle that the concerted action of powerful bodies of men shall not be permitted to stop the industrial processes of the nation , at any rate before the nation shall have had an opportunity to acquaint itself with the merits of the case as between employe and employer , time to form its opinion upon an impartial statement of the merits , and opportunity to consider all practicable means of conciliation or arbitration .
i can see nothing in that proposition but the justifiable safeguarding by society of the necessary processes of its very life .
there is nothing arbitrary or unjust in it unless it be arbitrarily and unjustly done .
it can and should be done with a full and scrupulous regard for the interests and liberties of all concerned as well as for the permanent interests of society itself .
three matters of capital importance await the action of the senate which have already been acted upon by the house of representatives ; the bill which seeks to extend greater freedom of combination to those engaged in promoting the foreign commerce of the country than is now thought by some to be legal under the terms of the laws against monopoly ; the bill amending the present organic law of porto rico ; and the bill proposing a more thorough and systematic regulation of the expenditure of money in elections , commonly called the corrupt practices act .
i need not labor my advice that these measures be enacted into law .
their urgency lies in the manifest circumstances which render their adoption at this time not only opportune but necessary .
even delay would seriously jeopard the interests of the country and of the government .
immediate passage of the bill to regulate the expenditure of money in elections may seem to be less necessary than the immediate enactment of the other measures to which i refer , because at least two years will elapse before another election in which federal offices are to be filled ; but it would greatly relieve the public mind if this important matter were dealt with while the circumstances and the dangers to the public morals of the present method of obtaining and spending campaign funds stand clear under recent observation , and the methods of expenditure can be frankly studied in the light of present experience ; and a delay would have the further very serious disadvantage of postponing action until another election was at hand and some special object connected with it might be thought to be in the mind of those who urged it .
action can be taken now with facts for guidance and without suspicion of partisan purpose .
i shall not argue at length the desirability of giving a freer hand in the matter of combined and concerted effort to those who shall undertake the essential enterprise of building up our export trade .
that enterprise will presently , will immediately assume , has indeed already assumed a magnitude unprecedented in our experience .
we have not the necessary instrumentalities for its prosecution ; it is deemed to be doubtful whether they could be created upon an adequate scale under our present laws .
we should clear away all legal obstacles and create a basis of undoubted law for it which will give freedom without permitting unregulated license .
the thing must be done now , because the opportunity is here and may escape us if we hesitate or delay .
the argument for the proposed amendments of the organic law of porto rico is brief and conclusive .
the present laws governing the island and regulating the rights and privileges of its people are not just .
we have created expectations of extended privilege which we have not satisfied .
there is uneasiness among the people of the island and even a suspicious doubt with regard to our intentions concerning them which the adoption of the pending measure would happily remove .
we do not doubt what we wish to do in any essential particular .
we ought to do it at once .
at the last session of the congress a bill was passed by the senate which provides for the promotion of vocational and industrial education , which is of vital importance to the whole country because it concerns a matter , too long neglected , upon which the thorough industrial preparation of the country for the critical years of economic development immediately ahead of us in very large measure depends .
may i not urge its early and favorable consideration by the house of representatives and its early enactment into law ?
it contains plans which affect all interests and all parts of the country , and i am sure that there is no legislation now pending before the congress whose passage the country awaits with more thoughtful approval or greater impatience to see a great and admirable thing set in the way of being done .
there are other matters already advanced to the stage of conference between the two houses of which it is not necessary that i should speak .
some practicable basis of agreement concerning them will no doubt be found an action taken upon them .
inasmuch as this is , gentlemen , probably the last occasion i shall have to address the sixty - fourth congress , i hope that you will permit me to say with what genuine pleasure and satisfaction i have co - operated with you in the many measures of constructive policy with which you have enriched the legislative annals of the country .
it has been a privilege to labor in such company .
i take the liberty of congratulating you upon the completion of a record of rare serviceableness and distinction .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 since i last had the privilege of addressing you on the state of the union the war of nations on the other side of the sea , which had then only begun to disclose its portentous proportions , has extended its threatening and sinister scope until it has swept within its flame some portion of every quarter of the globe , not excepting our own hemisphere , has altered the whole face of international affairs , and now presents a prospect of reorganization and reconstruction such as statesmen and peoples have never been called upon to attempt before .
we have stood apart , studiously neutral .
it was our manifest duty to do so .
not only did we have no part or interest in the policies which seem to have brought the conflict on ; it was necessary , if a universal catastrophe was to be avoided , that a limit should be set to the sweep of destructive war and that some part of the great family of nations should keep the processes of peace alive , if only to prevent collective economic ruin and the breakdown throughout the world of the industries by which its populations are fed and sustained .
it was manifestly the duty of the self - governed nations of this hemisphere to redress , if possible , the balance of economic loss and confusion in the other , if they could do nothing more .
in the day of readjustment and recuperation we earnestly hope and believe that they can be of infinite service .
in this neutrality , to which they were bidden not only by their separate life and their habitual detachment from the politics of europe but also by a clear perception of international duty , the states of america have become conscious of a new and more vital community of interest and moral partnership in affairs , more clearly conscious of the many common sympathies and interests and duties which bid them stand together .
there was a time in the early days of our own great nation and of the republics fighting their way to independence in central and south america when the government of the united states looked upon itself as in some sort the guardian of the republics to the south of her as against any encroachments or efforts at political control from the other side of the water ; felt it its duty to play the part even without invitation from them ; and i think that we can claim that the task was undertaken with a true and disinterested enthusiasm for the freedom of the americas and the unmolested self government of her independent peoples .
but it was always difficult to maintain such a role without offense to the pride of the peoples whose freedom of action we sought to protect , and without provoking serious misconceptions of our motives , and every thoughtful man of affairs must welcome the altered circumstances of the new day in whose light we now stand , when there is no claim of guardianship or thought of wards but , instead , a full and honorable association as of partners between ourselves and our neighbors , in the interest of all america , north and south .
our concern for the independence and prosperity of the states of central and south america is not altered .
we retain unabated the spirit that has inspired us throughout the whole life of our government and which was so frankly put into words by president monroe .
we still mean always to make a common cause of national independence and of political liberty in america .
but that purpose is now better understood so far as it concerns ourselves .
it is known not to be a selfish purpose .
it is known to have in it no thought of taking advantage of any government in this hemisphere or playing its political fortunes for our own benefit .
all the governments of america stand , so far as we are concerned , upon a footing of genuine equality and unquestioned independence .
we have been put to the test in the case of mexico , and we have stood the test .
whether we have benefited mexico by the course we have pursued remains to be seen .
her fortunes are in her own hands .
but we have at least proved that we will not take advantage of her in her distress and undertake to impose upon her an order and government of our own choosing .
liberty is often a fierce and intractable thing , to which no bounds can be set , and to which no bounds of a few men 's choosing ought ever to be set .
every american who has drunk at the true fountains of principle and tradition must subscribe without reservation to the high doctrine of the virginia bill of rights , which in the great days in which our government was set up was everywhere amongst us accepted as the creed of free men .
that doctrine is , " that government is , or ought to be , instituted for the common benefit , protection , and security of the people , nation , or community " ; that " of all the various modes and forms of government , that is the best which is capable of producing the greatest degree of happiness and safety , and is most effectually secured against the danger of maladministration ; and that , when any government shall be found inadequate or contrary to these purposes , a majority of the community hath an indubitable , inalienable , and indefeasible right to reform , alter , or abolish it , in such manner as shall be judged most conducive to the public weal . "
we have unhesitatingly applied that heroic principle to the case of mexico , and now hopefully await the rebirth of the troubled republic , which had so much of which to purge itself and so little sympathy from any outside quarter in the radical but necessary process .
we will aid and befriend mexico , but we will not coerce her ; and our course with regard to her ought to be sufficient proof to all america that we seek no political suzerainty or selfish control .
the moral is , that the states of america are not hostile rivals but cooperating friends , and that their growing sense of community or interest , alike in matters political and in matters economic , is likely to give them a new significance as factors in international affairs and in the political history of the world .
it presents them as in a very deep and true sense a unit in world affairs , spiritual partners , standing together because thinking together , quick with common sympathies and common ideals .
separated they are subject to all the cross currents of the confused politics of a world of hostile rivalries ; united in spirit and purpose they can not be disappointed of their peaceful destiny .
this is pan - americanism .
it has none of the spirit of empire in it .
it is the embodiment , the effectual embodiment , of the spirit of law and independence and liberty and mutual service .
a very notable body of men recently met in the city of washington , at the invitation and as the guests of this government , whose deliberations are likely to be looked back to as marking a memorable turning point in the history of america .
they were representative spokesmen of the several independent states of this hemisphere and were assembled to discuss the financial and commercial relations of the republics of the two continents which nature and political fortune have so intimately linked together .
i earnestly recommend to your perusal the reports of their proceedings and of the actions of their committees .
you will get from them , i think , a fresh conception of the ease and intelligence and advantage with which americans of both continents may draw together in practical cooperation and of what the material foundations of this hopeful partnership of interest must consist ,- of how we should build them and of how necessary it is that we should hasten their building .
there is , i venture to point out , an especial significance just now attaching to this whole matter of drawing the americans together in bonds of honorable partnership and mutual advantage because of the economic readjustments which the world must inevitably witness within the next generation , when peace shall have at last resumed its healthful tasks .
in the performance of these tasks i believe the americas to be destined to play their parts together .
i am interested to fix your attention on this prospect now because unless you take it within your view and permit the full significance of it to command your thought i can not find the right light in which to set forth the particular matter that lies at the very font of my whole thought as i address you to - day .
i mean national defense .
no one who really comprehends the spirit of the great people for whom we are appointed to speak can fail to perceive that their passion is for peace , their genius best displayed in the practice of the arts of peace .
great democracies are not belligerent .
they do not seek or desire war .
their thought is of individual liberty and of the free labor that supports life and the uncensored thought that quickens it .
conquest and dominion are not in our reckoning , or agreeable to our principles .
but just because we demand unmolested development and the undisturbed government of our own lives upon our own principles of right and liberty , we resent , from whatever quarter it may come , the aggression we ourselves will not practice .
we insist upon security in prosecuting our self - chosen lines of national development .
we do more than that .
we demand it also for others .
we do not confine our enthusiasm for individual liberty and free national development to the incidents and movements of affairs which affect only ourselves .
we feel it wherever there is a people that tries to walk in these difficult paths of independence and right .
from the first we have made common cause with all partisans of liberty on this side the sea , and have deemed it as important that our neighbors should be free from all outside domination as that we ourselves should be.- have set america aside as a whole for the uses of independent nations and political freemen .
out of such thoughts grow all our policies .
we regard war merely as a means of asserting the rights of a people against aggression .
and we are as fiercely jealous of coercive or dictatorial power within our own nation as of aggression from without .
we will not maintain a standing army except for uses which are as necessary in times of peace as in times of war ; and we shall always see to it that our military peace establishment is no larger than is actually and continuously needed for the uses of days in which no enemies move against us .
but we do believe in a body of free citizens ready and sufficient to take care of themselves and of the governments which they have set up to serve them .
in our constitutions themselves we have commanded that " the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed , " and our confidence has been that our safety in times of danger would lie in the rising of the nation to take care of itself , as the farmers rose at lexington .
but war has never been a mere matter of men and guns .
it is a thing of disciplined might .
if our citizens are ever to fight effectively upon a sudden summons , they must know how modern fighting is done , and what to do when the summons comes to render themselves immediately available and immediately effective .
and the government must be their servant in this matter , must supply them with the training they need to take care of themselves and of it .
the military arm of their government , which they will not allow to direct them , they may properly use to serve them and make their independence secure ,- and not their own independence merely but the rights also of those with whom they have made common cause , should they also be put in jeopardy .
they must be fitted to play the great role in the world , and particularly in this hemisphere , for which they are qualified by principle and by chastened ambition to play .
it is with these ideals in mind that the plans of the department of war for more adequate national defense were conceived which will be laid before you , and which i urge you to sanction and put into effect as soon as they can be properly scrutinized and discussed .
they seem to me the essential first steps , and they seem to me for the present sufficient .
they contemplate an increase of the standing force of the regular army from its present strength of five thousand and twenty - three officers and one hundred and two thousand nine hundred and eightyfive enlisted men of all services to a strength of seven thousand one hundred and thirty - six officers and one hundred and thirty - four thousand seven hundred and seven enlisted men , or 141,843 , all told , all services , rank and file , by the addition of fifty - two companies of coast artillery , fifteen companies of engineers , ten regiments of infantry , four regiments of field artillery , and four aero squadrons , besides seven hundred and fifty officers required for a great variety of extra service , especially the all important duty of training the citizen force of which i shall presently speak , seven hundred and ninety - two noncommissioned officers for service in drill , recruiting and the like , and the necessary quota of enlisted men for the quartermaster corps , the hospital corps , the ordnance department , and other similar auxiliary services .
these are the additions necessary to render the army adequate for its present duties , duties which it has to perform not only upon our own continental coasts and borders and at our interior army posts , but also in the philippines , in the hawaiian islands , at the isthmus , and in porto rico .
by way of making the country ready to assert some part of its real power promptly and upon a larger scale , should occasion arise , the plan also contemplates supplementing the army by a force of four hundred thousand disciplined citizens , raised in increments of one hundred and thirty - three thousand a year throughout a period of three years .
this it is proposed to do by a process of enlistment under which the serviceable men of the country would be asked to bind themselves to serve with the colors for purposes of training for short periods throughout three years , and to come to the colors at call at any time throughout an additional " furlough " period of three years .
this force of four hundred thousand men would be provided with personal accoutrements as fast as enlisted and their equipment for the field made ready to be supplied at any time .
they would be assembled for training at stated intervals at convenient places in association with suitable units of the regular army .
their period of annual training would not necessarily exceed two months in the year .
it would depend upon the patriotic feeling of the younger men of the country whether they responded to such a call to service or not .
it would depend upon the patriotic spirit of the employers of the country whether they made it possible for the younger men in their employ to respond under favorable conditions or not .
i , for one , do not doubt the patriotic devotion either of our young men or of those who give them employment ,-- those for whose benefit and protection they would in fact enlist .
i would look forward to the success of such an experiment with entire confidence .
at least so much by way of preparation for defense seems to me to be absolutely imperative now .
we can not do less .
the programme which will be laid before you by the secretary of the navy is similarly conceived .
it involves only a shortening of the time within which plans long matured shall be carried out ; but it does make definite and explicit a programme which has heretofore been only implicit , held in the minds of the committees on naval affairs and disclosed in the debates of the two houses but nowhere formulated or formally adopted .
it seems to me very clear that it will be to the advantage of the country for the congress to adopt a comprehensive plan for putting the navy upon a final footing of strength and efficiency and to press that plan to completion within the next five years .
we have always looked to the navy of the country as our first and chief line of defense ; we have always seen it to be our manifest course of prudence to be strong on the seas .
year by year we have been creating a navy which now ranks very high indeed among the navies of the maritime nations .
we should now definitely determine how we shall complete what we have begun , and how soon .
the programme to be laid before you contemplates the construction within five years of ten battleships , six battle cruisers , ten scout cruisers , fifty destroyers , fifteen fleet submarines , eighty - five coast submarines , four gunboats , one hospital ship , two ammunition ships , two fuel oil ships , and one repair ship .
it is proposed that of this number we shall the first year provide for the construction of two battleships , two battle cruisers , three scout cruisers , fifteen destroyers , five fleet submarines , twenty - five coast submarines , two gunboats , and one hospital ship ; the second year , two battleships , one scout cruiser , ten destroyers , four fleet submarines , fifteen coast submarines , one gunboat , and one fuel oil ship ; the third year , two battleships , one battle cruiser , two scout cruisers , five destroyers , two fleet sub marines , and fifteen coast submarines ; the fourth year , two battleships , two battle cruisers , two scout cruisers , ten destroyers , two fleet submarines , fifteen coast submarines , one ammunition ship , and one fuel oil ship ; and the fifth year , two battleships , one battle cruiser , two scout cruisers , ten destroyers , two fleet submarines , fifteen coast submarines , one gunboat , one ammunition ship , and one repair ship .
the secretary of the navy is asking also for the immediate addition to the personnel of the navy of seven thousand five hundred sailors , twenty - five hundred apprentice seamen , and fifteen hundred marines .
this increase would be sufficient to care for the ships which are to be completed within the fiscal year 1917 and also for the number of men which must be put in training to man the ships which will be completed early in 1918 .
it is also necessary that the number of midshipmen at the naval academy at annapolis should be increased by at least three hundred in order that the force of officers should be more rapidly added to ; and authority is asked to appoint , for engineering duties only , approved graduates of engineering colleges , and for service in the aviation corps a certain number of men taken from civil life .
if this full programme should be carried out we should have built or building in 1921 , according to the estimates of survival and standards of classification followed by the general board of the department , an effective navy consisting of twenty - seven battleships of the first line , six battle cruisers , twenty - five battleships of the second line , ten armored cruisers , thirteen scout cruisers , five first class cruisers , three second class cruisers , ten third class cruisers , one hundred and eight destroyers , eighteen fleet submarines , one hundred and fifty - seven coast submarines , six monitors , twenty gunboats , four supply ships , fifteen fuel ships , four transports , three tenders to torpedo vessels , eight vessels of special types , and two ammunition ships .
this would be a navy fitted to our needs and worthy of our traditions .
but armies and instruments of war are only part of what has to be considered if we are to provide for the supreme matter of national self - sufficiency and security in all its aspects .
there are other great matters which will be thrust upon our attention whether we will or not .
there is , for example , a very pressing question of trade and shipping involved in this great problem of national adequacy .
it is necessary for many weighty reasons of national efficiency and development that we should have a great merchant marine .
the great merchant fleet we once used to make us rich , that great body of sturdy sailors who used to carry our flag into every sea , and who were the pride and often the bulwark of the nation , we have almost driven out of existence by inexcusable neglect and indifference and by a hope lessly blind and provincial policy of so - called economic protection .
it is high time we repaired our mistake and resumed our commercial independence on the seas .
for it is a question of independence .
if other nations go to war or seek to hamper each other 's commerce , our merchants , it seems , are at their mercy , to do with as they please .
we must use their ships , and use them as they determine .
we have not ships enough of our own .
we can not handle our own commerce on the seas .
our independence is provincial , and is only on land and within our own borders .
we are not likely to be permitted to use even the ships of other nations in rivalry of their own trade , and are without means to extend our commerce even where the doors are wide open and our goods desired .
such a situation is not to be endured .
it is of capital importance not only that the united states should be its own carrier on the seas and enjoy the economic independence which only an adequate merchant marine would give it , but also that the american hemisphere as a whole should enjoy a like independence and self - sufficiency , if it is not to be drawn into the tangle of european affairs .
without such independence the whole question of our political unity and self - determination is very seriously clouded and complicated indeed .
moreover , we can develop no true or effective american policy without ships of our own ,-- not ships of war , but ships of peace , carrying goods and carrying much more : creating friendships and rendering indispensable services to all interests on this side the water .
they must move constantly back and forth between the americas .
they are the only shuttles that can weave the delicate fabric of sympathy , -comprehension , confidence , and mutual dependence in which we wish to clothe our policy of america for americans .
the task of building up an adequate merchant marine for america private capital must ultimately undertake and achieve , as it has undertaken and achieved every other like task amongst us in the past , with admirable enterprise , intelligence , and vigor ; and it seems to me a manifest dictate of wisdom that we should promptly remove every legal obstacle that may stand in the way of this much to be desired revival of our old independence and should facilitate in every possible way the building , purchase , and american registration of ships .
but capital can not accomplish this great task of a sudden .
it must embark upon it by degrees , as the opportunities of trade develop .
something must be done at once ; done to open routes and develop opportunities where they are as yet undeveloped ; done to open the arteries of trade where the currents have not yet learned to run ,- especially between the two american continents , where they are , singularly enough , yet to be created and quickened ; and it is evident that only the government can undertake such beginnings and assume the initial financial risks .
when the risk has passed and private capital begins to find its way in sufficient abundance into these new channels , the government may withdraw .
but it can not omit to begin .
it should take the first steps , and should take them at once .
our goods must not lie piled up at our ports and stored upon side tracks in freight cars which are daily needed on the roads ; must not be left without means of transport to any foreign quarter .
we must not await the permission of foreign ship - owners and foreign governments to send them where we will .
with a view to meeting these pressing necessities of our commerce and availing ourselves at the earliest possible moment of the present unparalleled opportunity of linking the two americas together in bonds of mutual interest and service , an opportunity which may never return again if we miss it now , proposals will be made to the present congress for the purchase or construction of ships to be owned and directed by the government similar to those made to the last congress , but modified in some essential particulars .
i recommend these proposals to you for your prompt acceptance with the more confidence because every month that has elapsed since the former proposals were made has made the necessity for such action more and more manifestly imperative .
that need was then foreseen ; it is now acutely felt and everywhere realized by those for whom trade is waiting but who can find no conveyance for their goods .
i am not so much interested in the particulars of the programme as i am in taking immediate advantage of the great opportunity which awaits us if we will but act in this emergency .
in this matter , as in all others , a spirit of common counsel should prevail , and out of it should come an early solution of this pressing problem .
there is another matter which seems to me to be very intimately associated with the question of national safety and preparation for defense .
that is our policy towards the philippines and the people of porto rico .
our treatment of them and their attitude towards us are manifestly of the first consequence in the development of our duties in the world and in getting a free hand to perform those duties .
we must be free from every unnecessary burden or embarrassment ; and there is no better way to be clear of embarrassment than to fulfil our promises and promote the interests of those dependent on us to the utmost .
bills for the alteration and reform of the government of the philippines and for rendering fuller political justice to the people of porto rico were submitted to the sixty - third congress .
they will be submitted also to you .
i need not particularize their details .
you are most of you already familiar with them .
but i do recommend them to your early adoption with the sincere conviction that there are few measures you could adopt which would more serviceably clear the way for the great policies by which we wish to make good , now and always , our right to lead in enterpriscs of peace and good will and economic and political freedom .
the plans for the armed forces of the nation which i have outlined , and for the general policy of adequate preparation for mobilization and defense , involve of course very large additional expenditures of money ,- expenditures which will considerably exceed the estimated revenues of the government .
it is made my duty by law , whenever the estimates of expenditure exceed the estimates of revenue , to call the attention of the congress to the fact and suggest any means of meeting the deficiency that it may be wise or possible for me to suggest .
i am ready to believe that it would be my duty to do so in any case ; and i feel particularly bound to speak of the matter when it appears that the deficiency will arise directly out of the adoption by the congress of measures which i myself urge it to adopt .
allow me , therefore , to speak briefly of the present state of the treasury and of the fiscal problems which the next year will probably disclose .
on the thirtieth of june last there was an available balance in the general fund of the treasury of $ 104,170,105.78 .
the total estimated receipts for the year 1916 , on the assumption that the emergency revenue measure passed by the last congress will not be extended beyond its present limit , the thirty - first of december , 1915 , and that the present duty of one cent per pound on sugar will be discontinued after the first of may , 1916 , will be $ 670,365,500 .
the balance of june last and these estimated revenues come , therefore , to a grand total of $ 774,535,605 - 78 .
the total estimated disbursements for the present fiscal year , including twenty - five millions for the panama canal , twelve millions for probable deficiency appropriations , and fifty thousand dollars for miscellaneous debt redemptions , will be $ 753,891,000 ; and the balance in the general fund of the treasury will be reduced to $ 20,644,605.78 .
the emergency revenue act , if continued beyond its present time limitation , would produce , during the half year then remaining , about forty - one millions .
the duty of one cent per pound on sugar , if continued , would produce during the two months of the fiscal year remaining after the first of may , about fifteen millions .
these two sums , amounting together to fifty - six millions , if added to the revenues of the second half of the fiscal year , would yield the treasury at the end of the year an available balance of $ 76,644,605 - 78 .
the additional revenues required to carry out the programme of military and naval preparation of which i have spoken , would , as at present estimated , be for the fiscal year , 1917 , $ 93,800,000 .
those figures , taken with the figures for the present fiscal year which i have already given , disclose our financial problem for the year 1917 .
assuming that the taxes imposed by the emergency revenue act and the present duty on sugar are to be discontinued , and that the balance at the close of the present fiscal year will be only $ 20,644,605.78 , that the disbursements for the panama canal will again be about twenty - five millions , and that the additional expenditures for the army and navy are authorized by the congress , the deficit in the general fund of the treasury on the thirtieth of june , 1917 , will be nearly two hundred and thirty - five millions .
to this sum at least fifty millions should be added to represent a safe working balance for the treasury , and twelve millions to include the usual deficiency estimates in 1917 ; and these additions would make a total deficit of some two hundred and ninety - seven millions .
if the present taxes should be continued throughout this year and the next , however , there would be a balance in the treasury of some seventy - six and a half millions at the end of the present fiscal year , and a deficit at the end of the next year of only some fifty millions , or , reckoning in sixty - two millions for deficiency appropriations and a safe treasury balance at the end of the year , a total deficit of some one hundred and twelve millions .
the obvious moral of the figures is that it is a plain counsel of prudence to continue all of the present taxes or their equivalents , and confine ourselves to the problem of providing one hundred and twelve millions of new revenue rather than two hundred and ninety - seven millions .
how shall we obtain the new revenue ?
we are frequently reminded that there are many millions of bonds which the treasury is authorized under existing law to sell to reimburse the sums paid out of current revenues for the construction of the panama canal ; and it is true that bonds to the amount of approximately $ 222,000,000 are now available for that purpose .
prior to 1913 , $ 134,631,980 of these bonds had actually been sold to recoup the expenditures at the isthmus ; and now constitute a considerable item of the public debt .
but i , for one , do not believe that the people of this country approve of postponing the payment of their bills .
borrowing money is short - sighted finance .
it can be justified only when permanent things are to be accomplished which many generations will certainly benefit by and which it seems hardly fair that a single generation should pay for .
the objects we are now proposing to spend money for can not be so classified , except in the sense that everything wisely done may be said to be done in the interest of posterity as well as in our own .
it seems to me a clear dictate of prudent statesmanship and frank finance that in what we are now , i hope , about to undertake we should pay as we go .
the people of the country are entitled to know just what burdens of taxation they are to carry , and to know from the outset , now .
the new bills should be paid by internal taxation .
to what sources , then , shall we turn ?
this is so peculiarly a question which the gentlemen of the house of representatives are expected under the constitution to propose an answer to that you will hardly expect me to do more than discuss it in very general terms .
we should be following an almost universal example of modern governments if we were to draw the greater part or even the whole of the revenues we need from the income taxes .
by somewhat lowering the present limits of exemption and the figure at which the surtax shall begin to be imposed , and by increasing , step by step throughout the present graduation , the surtax itself , the income taxes as at present apportioned would yield sums sufficient to balance the books of the treasury at the end of the fiscal year 1917 without anywhere making the burden unreasonably or oppressively heavy .
the precise reckonings are fully and accurately set out in the report of the secretary of the treasury which will be immediately laid before you .
and there are many additional sources of revenue which can justly be resorted to without hampering the industries of the country or putting any too great charge upon individual expenditure .
a tax of one cent per gallon on gasoline and naphtha would yield , at the present estimated production , $ 10,000,000 ; a tax of fifty cents per horse power on automobiles and internal explosion engines , $ 15,000,000 ; a stamp tax on bank cheques , probably $ 18,000,000 ; a tax of twenty - five cents per ton on pig iron , $ 10,000,000 ; a tax of twenty - five cents per ton on fabricated iron and steel , probably $ 10,000,000 .
in a country of great industries like this it ought to be easy to distribute the burdens of taxation without making them anywhere bear too heavily or too exclusively upon any one set of persons or undertakings .
what is clear is , that the industry of this generation should pay the bills of this generation .
i have spoken to you to - day , gentlemen , upon a single theme , the thorough preparation of the nation to care for its own security and to make sure of entire freedom to play the impartial role in this hemisphere and in the world which we all believe to have been providentially assigned to it .
i have had in my mind no thought of any immediate or particular danger arising out of our relations with other nations .
we are at peace with all the nations of the world , and there is reason to hope that no question in controversy between this and other governments will lead to any serious breach of amicable relations , grave as some differences of attitude and policy have been land may yet turn out to be .
i am sorry to say that the gravest threats against our national peace and safety have been uttered within our own borders .
there are citizens of the united states , i blush to admit , born under other flags but welcomed under our generous naturalization laws to the full freedom and opportunity of america , who have poured the poison of disloyalty into the very arteries of our national life ; who have sought to bring the authority and good name of our government into contempt , to destroy our industries wherever they thought it effective for their vindictive purposes to strike at them , and to debase our politics to the uses of foreign intrigue .
their number is not great as compared with the whole number of those sturdy hosts by which our nation has been enriched in recent generations out of virile foreign stock ; but it is great enough to have brought deep disgrace upon us and to have made it necessary that we should promptly make use of processes of law by which we may be purged of their corrupt distempers .
america never witnessed anything like this before .
it never dreamed it possible that men sworn into its own citizenship , men drawn out of great free stocks such as supplied some of the best and strongest elements of that little , but how heroic , nation that in a high day of old staked its very life to free itself from every entanglement that had darkened the fortunes of the older nations and set up a new standard here , that men of such origins and such free choices of allegiance would ever turn in malign reaction against the government and people who bad welcomed and nurtured them and seek to make this proud country once more a hotbed of european passion .
a little while ago such a thing would have seemed incredible .
because it was incredible we made no preparation for it .
we would have been almost ashamed to prepare for it , as if we were suspicious of ourselves , our own comrades and neighbors !
but the ugly and incredible thing has actually come about and we are without adequate federal laws to deal with it .
i urge you to enact such laws at the earliest possible moment and feel that in doing so i am urging you to do nothing less than save the honor and self - respect of the nation .
such creatures of passion , disloyalty , and anarchy must be crushed out .
they are not many , but they are infinitely malignant , and the hand of our power should close over them at once .
they have formed plots to destroy property , they have entered into conspiracies against the neutrality of the government , they have sought to pry into every confidential transaction of the government in order to serve interests alien to our own .
it is possible to deal with these things very effectually .
i need not suggest the terms in which they may be dealt with .
i wish that it could be said that only a few men , misled by mistaken sentiments of allegiance to the governments under which they were born , had been guilty of disturbing the self - possession and misrepresenting the temper and principles of the country during these days of terrible war , when it would seem that every man who was truly an american would instinctively make it his duty and his pride to keep the scales of judgment even and prove himself a partisan of no nation but his own .
but it can not .
there are some men among us , and many resident abroad who , though born and bred in the united states and calling themselves americans , have so forgotten themselves and their honor as citizens as to put their passionate sympathy with one or the other side in the great european conflict above their regard for the peace and dignity of the united states .
they also preach and practice disloyalty .
no laws , i suppose , can reach corruptions of the mind and heart ; but i should not speak of others without also speaking of these and expressing the even deeper humiliation and scorn which every self - possessed and thoughtfully patriotic american must feel when lie thinks of them and of the discredit they are daily bringing upon us .
while we speak of the preparation of the nation to make sure of her security and her effective power we must not fall into the patent error of supposing that her real strength comes from armaments and mere safeguards of written law .
it comes , of course , from her people , their energy , their success in their undertakings , their free opportunity to use the natural resources of our great home land and of the lands outside our continental borders which look to us for protection , for encouragement , and for assistance in their development ; from the organization and freedom and vitality of our economic life .
the domestic questions which engaged the attention of the last congress are more vital to the nation in this its time of test than at any other time .
we can not adequately make ready for any trial of our strength unless we wisely and promptly direct the force of our laws into these all - important fields of domestic action .
a matter which it seems to me we should have very much at heart is the creation of the right instrumentalities by which to mobilize our economic resources in any time of national necessity .
i take it for granted that i do not need your authority to call into systematic consultation with the directing officers of the army and navy men of recognized leadership and ability from among our citizens who are thoroughly familiar , for example , with the transportation facilities of the country and therefore competent to advise how they may be coordinated when the need arises , those who can suggest the best way in which to bring about prompt cooperation among the manufacturers of the country , should it be necessary , and those who could assist to bring the technical skill of the country to the aid of the government in the solution of particular problems of defense .
i only hope that if i should find it feasible to constitute such an advisory body the congress would be willing to vote the small sum of money that would be needed to defray the expenses that would probably be necessary to give it the clerical and administrative machinery with which to do serviceable work .
what is more important is , that the industries and resources of the country should be available and ready for mobilization .
it is the more imperatively necessary , therefore , that we should promptly devise means for doing what we have not yet done : that we should give intelligent federal aid and stimulation to industrial and vocational education , as we have long done in the large field of our agricultural industry ; that , at the same time that we safeguard and conserve the natural resources of the country we should put them at the disposal of those who will use them promptly and intelligently , as was sought to be done in the admirable bills submitted to the last congress from its committees on the public lands , bills which i earnestly recommend in principle to your consideration ; that we should put into early operation some provision for rural credits which will add to the extensive borrowing facilities already afforded the farmer by the reserve bank act , adequate instrumentalities by which long credits may be obtained on land mortgages ; and that we should study more carefully than they have hitherto been studied the right adaptation of our economic arrangements to changing conditions .
many conditions about which we have repeatedly legislated are being altered from decade to decade , it is evident , under our very eyes , and are likely to change even more rapidly and more radically in the days immediately ahead of us , when peace has returned to the world and the nations of europe once more take up their tasks of commerce and industry with the energy of those who must bestir themselves to build anew .
just what these changes will be no one can certainly foresee or confidently predict .
there are no calculable , because no stable , elements in the problem .
the most we can do is to make certain that we have the necessary instrumentalities of information constantly at our service so that we may be sure that we know exactly what we are dealing with when we come to act , if it should be necessary to act at all .
we must first certainly know what it is that we are seeking to adapt ourselves to .
i may ask the privilege of addressing you more at length on this important matter a little later in your session .
in the meantime may i make this suggestion ?
the transportation problem is an exceedingly serious and pressing one in this country .
there has from time to time of late been reason to fear that our railroads would not much longer be able to cope with it successfully , as at present equipped and coordinated i suggest that it would be wise to provide for a commission of inquiry to ascertain by a thorough canvass of the whole question whether our laws as at present framed and administered are as serviceable as they might be ' in the solution of the problem .
it is obviously a problem that lies at the very foundation of our efficiency as a people .
such an inquiry ought to draw out every circumstance and opinion worth considering and we need to know all sides of the matter if we mean to do anything in the field of federal legislation .
no one , i am sure , would wish to take any backward step .
the regulation of the railways of the country by federal commission has had admirable results and has fully justified the hopes and expectations of those by whom the policy of regulation was originally proposed .
the question is not what should we undo .
it is , whether there is anything else we can do that would supply us with effective means , in the very process of regulation , for bettering the conditions under which the railroads are operated and for making them more useful servants of the country as a whole .
it seems to me that it might be the part of wisdom , therefore , before further legislation in this field is attempted , to look at the whole problem of coordination and efficiency in the full light of a fresh assessment of circumstance and opinion , as a guide to dealing with the several parts of it .
for what we are seeking now , what in my mind is the single thought of this message , is national efficiency and security .
we serve a great nation .
we should serve it in the spirit of its peculiar genius .
it is the genius of common men for self - government , industry , justice , liberty and peace .
we should see to it that it lacks no instrument , no facility or vigor of law , to make it sufficient to play its part with energy , safety , and assured success .
in this we are no partisans but heralds and prophets of a new age .

mr. speaker , mr. president , gentlemen of the congress : 
 it is under the compulsion of what seems to me a clear and imperative duty that i have a second time this session sought the privilege of addressing you in person .
i know , of course , that the heated season of the year is upon us , that work in these chambers and in the committee rooms is likely to become a burden as the season lengthens , and that every consideration of personal convenience and personal comfort , perhaps , in the cases of some of us , considerations of personal health even , dictate an early conclusion of the deliberations of the session ; but there are occasions of public duty when these things which touch us privately seem very small , when the work to be done is so pressing and so fraught with big consequence that we know that we are not at liberty to weigh against it any point of personal sacrifice .
we are now in the presence of such an occasion .
it is absolutely imperative that we should give the business men of this country a banking and currency system by means of which they can make use of the freedom of enterprise and of individual initiative which we are about to bestow upon them .
we are about to set them free ; we must not leave them without the tools of action when they are free .
we are about to set them free by removing the trammels of the protective tariff .
ever since the civil war they have waited for this emancipation and for the free opportunities it will bring with it .
it has been reserved for us to give it to them .
some fell in love , indeed , with the slothful security of their dependence upon the government ; some took advantage of the shelter of the nursery to set up a mimic mastery of their own within its walls .
now both the tonic and the discipline of liberty and maturity are to ensue .
there will be some readjustments of purpose and point of view .
there will follow a period of expansion and new enterprise , freshly conceived .
it is for us to determine now whether it shall be rapid and facile and of easy accomplishment .
this it can not be unless the resourceful business men who are to deal with the new circumstances are to have at hand and ready for use the instrumentalities and conveniences of free enterprise which independent men need when acting on their own initiative .
it is not enough to strike the shackles from business .
the duty of statesmanship is not negative merely .
it is constructive also .
we must show that we understand what business needs and that we know how to supply it .
no man , however casual and superficial his observation of the conditions now prevailing in the country , can fail to see that one of the chief things business needs now , and will need increasingly as it gains in scope and vigor in the years immediately ahead of us , is the proper means by which readily to vitalize its credit , corporate and individual , and its originative brains .
what will it profit us to be free if we are not to have the best and most accessible instrumentalities of commerce and enterprise ?
what will it profit us to be quit of one kind of monopoly if we are to remain in the grip of another and more effective kind ?
how are we to gain and keep the confidence of the business community unless we show that we know how both to aid and to protect it ?
what shall we say if we make fresh enterprise necessary and also make it very difficult by leaving all else except the tariff just as we found it ?
the tyrannies of business , big and little , lie within the field of credit .
we know that .
shall we not act upon the knowledge ?
do we not know how to act upon it ?
if a man can not make his assets available at pleasure , his assets of capacity and character and resource , what satisfaction is it to him to see opportunity beckoning to him on every hand , when others have the keys of credit in their pockets and treat them as all but their own private possession ?
it is perfectly clear that it is our duty to supply the new banking and currency system the country needs , and it will need it immediately more than it has ever needed it before .
the only question is , when shall we supply it -- now , or later , after the demands shall have become reproaches that we were so dull and so slow ?
shall we hasten to change the tariff laws and then be laggards about making it possible and easy for the country to take advantage of the change ?
there can be only one answer to that question .
we must act now , at whatever sacrifice to ourselves .
it is a duty which the circumstances forbid us to postpone .
i should be recreant to my deepest convictions of public obligation did i not press it upon you with solemn and urgent insistence .
the principles upon which we should act are also clear .
the country has sought and seen its path in this matter within the last few years -- sees it more clearly now than it ever saw it before -- much more clearly than when the last legislative proposals on the subject were made .
we must have a currency , not rigid as now , but readily , elastically responsive to sound credit , the expanding and contracting credits of everyday transactions , the normal ebb and flow of personal and corporate dealings .
our banking laws must mobilize reserves ; must not permit the concentration anywhere in a few hands of the monetary resources of the country or their use for speculative purposes in such volume as to hinder or impede or stand in the way of other more legitimate , more fruitful uses .
and the control of the system of banking and of issue which our new laws are to set up must be public , not private , must be vested in the government itself , so that the banks may be the instruments , not the masters , of business and of individual enterprise and initiative .
the committees of the congress to which legislation of this character is referred have devoted careful and dispassionate study to the means of accomplishing these objects .
they have honored me by consulting me .
they are ready to suggest action .
i have come to you , as the head of the government and the responsible leader of the party in power , to urge action now , while there is time to serve the country deliberately and as we should , in a clear air of common counsel .
i appeal to you with a deep conviction of duty .
i believe that you share this conviction .
i therefore appeal to you with confidence .
i am at your service without reserve to play my part in any way you may call upon me to play it in this great enterprise of exigent reform which it will dignify and distinguish us to perform and discredit us to neglect .

my fellow citizens : 

 the four years which have elapsed since last i stood in this place have been crowded with counsel and action of the most vital interest and consequence .
perhaps no equal period in our history has been so fruitful of important reforms in our economic and industrial life or so full of significant changes in the spirit and purpose of our political action .
we have sought very thoughtfully to set our house in order , correct the grosser errors and abuses of our industrial life , liberate and quicken the processes of our national genius and energy , and lift our politics to a broader view of the people 's essential interests .
it is a record of singular variety and singular distinction .
but i shall not attempt to review it .
it speaks for itself and will be of increasing influence as the years go by .
this is not the time for retrospect .
it is time rather to speak our thoughts and purposes concerning the present and the immediate future .
although we have centered counsel and action with such unusual concentration and success upon the great problems of domestic legislation to which we addressed ourselves four years ago , other matters have more and more forced themselves upon our attention-- matters lying outside our own life as a nation and over which we had no control , but which , despite our wish to keep free of them , have drawn us more and more irresistibly into their own current and influence .
it has been impossible to avoid them .
they have affected the life of the whole world .
they have shaken men everywhere with a passion and an apprehension they never knew before .
it has been hard to preserve calm counsel while the thought of our own people swayed this way and that under their influence .
we are a composite and cosmopolitan people .
we are of the blood of all the nations that are at war .
the currents of our thoughts as well as the currents of our trade run quick at all seasons back and forth between us and them .
the war inevitably set its mark from the first alike upon our minds , our industries , our commerce , our politics and our social action .
to be indifferent to it , or independent of it , was out of the question .
and yet all the while we have been conscious that we were not part of it .
in that consciousness , despite many divisions , we have drawn closer together .
we have been deeply wronged upon the seas , but we have not wished to wrong or injure in return ; have retained throughout the consciousness of standing in some sort apart , intent upon an interest that transcended the immediate issues of the war itself .
as some of the injuries done us have become intolerable we have still been clear that we wished nothing for ourselves that we were not ready to demand for all mankind -- fair dealing , justice , the freedom to live and to be at ease against organized wrong .
it is in this spirit and with this thought that we have grown more and more aware , more and more certain that the part we wished to play was the part of those who mean to vindicate and fortify peace .
we have been obliged to arm ourselves to make good our claim to a certain minimum of right and of freedom of action .
we stand firm in armed neutrality since it seems that in no other way we can demonstrate what it is we insist upon and can not forget .
we may even be drawn on , by circumstances , not by our own purpose or desire , to a more active assertion of our rights as we see them and a more immediate association with the great struggle itself .
but nothing will alter our thought or our purpose .
they are too clear to be obscured .
they are too deeply rooted in the principles of our national life to be altered .
we desire neither conquest nor advantage .
we wish nothing that can be had only at the cost of another people .
we always professed unselfish purpose and we covet the opportunity to prove our professions are sincere .
there are many things still to be done at home , to clarify our own politics and add new vitality to the industrial processes of our own life , and we shall do them as time and opportunity serve , but we realize that the greatest things that remain to be done must be done with the whole world for stage and in cooperation with the wide and universal forces of mankind , and we are making our spirits ready for those things .
we are provincials no longer .
the tragic events of the thirty months of vital turmoil through which we have just passed have made us citizens of the world .
there can be no turning back .
our own fortunes as a nation are involved whether we would have it so or not .
and yet we are not the less americans on that account .
we shall be the more american if we but remain true to the principles in which we have been bred .
they are not the principles of a province or of a single continent .
we have known and boasted all along that they were the principles of a liberated mankind .
these , therefore , are the things we shall stand for , whether in war or in peace : 

 that all nations are equally interested in the peace of the world and in the political stability of free peoples , and equally responsible for their maintenance ; that the essential principle of peace is the actual equality of nations in all matters of right or privilege ; that peace can not securely or justly rest upon an armed balance of power ; that governments derive all their just powers from the consent of the governed and that no other powers should be supported by the common thought , purpose or power of the family of nations ; that the seas should be equally free and safe for the use of all peoples , under rules set up by common agreement and consent , and that , so far as practicable , they should be accessible to all upon equal terms ; that national armaments shall be limited to the necessities of national order and domestic safety ; that the community of interest and of power upon which peace must henceforth depend imposes upon each nation the duty of seeing to it that all influences proceeding from its own citizens meant to encourage or assist revolution in other states should be sternly and effectually suppressed and prevented .
i need not argue these principles to you , my fellow countrymen ; they are your own part and parcel of your own thinking and your own motives in affairs .
they spring up native amongst us .
upon this as a platform of purpose and of action we can stand together .
and it is imperative that we should stand together .
we are being forged into a new unity amidst the fires that now blaze throughout the world .
in their ardent heat we shall , in god 's providence , let us hope , be purged of faction and division , purified of the errant humors of party and of private interest , and shall stand forth in the days to come with a new dignity of national pride and spirit .
let each man see to it that the dedication is in his own heart , the high purpose of the nation in his own mind , ruler of his own will and desire .
i stand here and have taken the high and solemn oath to which you have been audience because the people of the united states have chosen me for this august delegation of power and have by their gracious judgment named me their leader in affairs .
i know now what the task means .
i realize to the full the responsibility which it involves .
i pray god i may be given the wisdom and the prudence to do my duty in the true spirit of this great people .
i am their servant and can succeed only as they sustain and guide me by their confidence and their counsel .
the thing i shall count upon , the thing without which neither counsel nor action will avail , is the unity of america -- an america united in feeling , in purpose and in its vision of duty , of opportunity and of service .
we are to beware of all men who would turn the tasks and the necessities of the nation to their own private profit or use them for the building up of private power .
united alike in the conception of our duty and in the high resolve to perform it in the face of all men , let us dedicate ourselves to the great task to which we must now set our hand .
for myself i beg your tolerance , your countenance and your united aid .
the shadows that now lie dark upon our path will soon be dispelled , and we shall walk with the light all about us if we be but true to ourselves -- to ourselves as we have wished to be known in the counsels of the world and in the thought of all those who love liberty and justice and the right exalted .

senator james , gentlemen of the notification committee , fellow - citizens : 
 i can not accept the leadership and responsibility which the national democratic convention has again , in such generous fashion , asked me to accept without first expressing my profound gratitude to the party for the trust it reposes in me after four years of fiery trial in the midst of affairs of unprecedented difficulty , and the keen sense of added responsibility with which this honor fills ( i had almost said burdens ) me as i think of the great issues of national life and policy involved in the present and immediate future conduct of our government .
i shall seek , as i have always sought , to justify the extraordinary confidence thus reposed in me by striving to purge my heart and purpose of every personal and of every misleading party motive and devoting every energy i have to the service of the nation as a whole , praying that i may continue to have the counsel and support of all forward - looking men at every turn of the difficult business .
for i do not doubt that the people of the united states will wish the democratic party to continue in control of the government .
they are not in the habit of rejecting those who have actually served them for those who are making doubtful and conjectural promises of service .
least of all are they likely to substitute those who promised to render them particular services and proved false to that promise for those who have actually rendered those very services .
boasting is always an empty business , which pleases nobody but the boaster , and i have no disposition to boast of what the democratic party has accomplished .
it has merely done its duty .
it has merely fulfilled its explicit promises .
but there can be no violation of good taste in calling attention to the manner in which those promises have been carried out or in adverting to the interesting fact that many of the things accomplished were what the opposition party had again and again promised to do but had left undone .
indeed that is manifestly part of the business of this year of reckoning and assessment .
there is no means of judging the future except by assessing the past .
constructive action must be weighed against destructive comment and reaction .
the democrats either have or have not understood the varied interests of the country .
the test is contained in the record .
what is that record ?
what were the democrats called into power to do ?
what things had long waited to be done , and how did the democrats do them ?
it is a record of extraordinary length and variety , rich in elements of many kinds , but consistent in principle throughout and susceptible of brief recital .
the republican party was put out of power because of failure , practical failure and moral failure ; because it had served special interests and not the country at large ; because , under the leadership of its preferred and established guides , of those who still make its choices , it had lost touch with the thoughts and the needs of the nation and was living in a past age and under a fixed illusion , the illusion of greatness .
it had framed tariff laws based upon a fear of foreign trade , a fundamental doubt as to american skill , enterprise , and capacity , and a very tender regard for the profitable privileges of those who had gained control of domestic markets and domestic credits ; and yet had enacted anti - trust laws which hampered the very things they meant to foster , which were stiff and inelastic , and in part unintelligible .
it had permitted the country throughout the long period of its control to stagger from one financial crisis to another under the operation of a national banking law of its own framing which made stringency and panic certain and the control of the larger business operations of the country by the bankers of a few reserve centers inevitable ; had made as if it meant to reform the law but had faint - heartedly failed in the attempt , because it could not bring itself to do the one thing necessary to make the reform genuine and effectual , namely , break up the control of small groups of bankers .
it had been oblivious , or indifferent , to the fact that the farmers , upon whom the country depends for its food and in the last analysis for its prosperity , were without standing in the matter of commercial credit , without the protection of standards in their market transactions , and without systematic knowledge of the markets themselves ; that the laborers of the country , the great army of men who man the industries it was professing to father and promote , carried their labor as a mere commodity to market , were subject to restraint by novel and drastic process in the courts , were without assurance of compensation for industrial accidents , without federal assistance in accommodating labor disputes , and without national aid or advice in finding the places and the industries in which their labor was most needed .
the country had no national system of road construction and development .
little intelligent attention was paid to the army , and not enough to the navy .
the other republics of america distrusted us , because they found that we thought first of the profits of american investors and only as an afterthought of impartial justice and helpful friendship .
its policy was provincial in all things ; its purposes were out of harmony with the temper and purpose of the people and the timely development of the nation 's interests .
so things stood when the democratic party came into power .
how do they stand now ?
alike in the domestic field and in the wide field of the commerce of the world , american business and life and industry have been set free to move as they never moved before .
the tariff has been revised , not on the principle of repelling foreign trade , but upon the principle of encouraging it , upon something like a footing of equality with our own in respect of the terms of competition , and a tariff board has been created whose function it will be to keep the relations of american with foreign business and industry under constant observation , for the guidance alike of our business men and of our congress .
american energies are now directed towards the markets of the world .
the laws against trusts have been clarified by definition , with a view to making it plain that they were not directed against big business but only against unfair business and the pretense of competition where there was none ; and a trade commission has been created with powers of guidance and accommodation which have relieved business men of unfounded fears and set them upon the road of hopeful and confident enterprise .
by the federal reserve act the supply of currency at the disposal of active business has been rendered elastic , taking its volume , not from a fixed body of investment securities , but from the liquid assets of daily trade ; and these assets are assessed and accepted , not by distant groups of bankers in control of unavailable reserves , but by bankers at the many centers of local exchange who are in touch with local conditions everywhere .
effective measures have been taken for the re - creation of an american merchant marine and the revival of the american carrying trade indispensable to our emancipation from the control which foreigners have so long exercised over the opportunities , the routes , and the methods of our commerce with other countries .
the interstate commerce commission is about to be reorganized to enable it to perform its great and important functions more promptly and more efficiently .
we have created , extended and improved the service of the parcels post .
so much we have done for business .
what other party has understood the task so well or executed it so intelligently and energetically ?
what other party has attempted it at all ?
the republican leaders , apparently , know of no means of assisting business but " protection . "
how to stimulate it and put it upon a new footing of energy and enterprise they have not suggested .
for the farmers of the country we have virtually created commercial credit , by means of the federal reserve act and the rural credits act .
they now have the standing of other business men in the money market .
we have successfully regulated speculation in " futures " and established standards in the marketing of grains .
by an intelligent warehouse act we have assisted to make the standard crops available as never before both for systematic marketing and as a security for loans from the banks .
we have greatly added to the work of neighborhood demonstration on the farm itself of improved methods of cultivation , and , through the intelligent extension of the functions of the department of agriculture , have made it possible for the farmer to learn systematically where his best markets are and how to get at them .
the workingmen of america have been given a veritable emancipation , by the legal recognition of a man 's labor as part of his life , and not a mere marketable commodity ; by exempting labor organizations from processes of the courts which treated their members like fractional parts of mobs and not like accessible and responsible individuals ; by releasing our seamen from involuntary servitude ; by making adequate provision for compensation for industrial accidents ; by providing suitable machinery for mediation and conciliation in industrial disputes ; and by putting the federal department of labor at the disposal of the workingman when in search of work .
we have effected the emancipation of the children of the country by releasing them from hurtful labor .
we have instituted a system of national aid in the building of highroads such as the country has been feeling after for a century .
we have sought to equalize taxation by means of an equitable income tax .
we have taken the steps that ought to have been taken at the outset to open up the resources of alaska .
we have provided for national defense upon a scale never before seriously proposed upon the responsibility of an entire political party .
we have driven the tariff lobby from cover and obliged it to substitute solid argument for private influence .
this extraordinary recital must sound like a platform , a list of sanguine promises ; but it is not .
it is a record of promises made four years ago and now actually redeemed in constructive legislation .
these things must profoundly disturb the thoughts and confound the plans of those who have made themselves believe that the democratic party neither understood nor was ready to assist the business of the country in the great enterprises which it is its evident and inevitable destiny to undertake and carry through .
the breaking up of the lobby must especially disconcert them : for it was through the lobby that they sought and were sure they had found the heart of things .
the game of privilege can be played successfully by no other means .
this record must equally astonish those who feared that the democratic party had not opened its heart to comprehend the demands of social justice .
we have in four years come very near to carrying out the platform of the progressive party as well as our own ; for we also are progressives .
there is one circumstance connected with this program which ought to be very plainly stated .
it was resisted at every step by the interests which the republican party had catered to and fostered at the expense of the country , and these same interests are now earnestly praying for a reaction which will save their privileges,?for the restoration of their sworn friends to power before it is too late to recover what they have lost .
they fought with particular desperation and infinite resourcefulness the reform of the banking and currency system , knowing that to be the citadel of their control ; and most anxiously are they hoping and planning for the amendment of the federal reserve act by the concentration of control in a single bank which the old familiar group of bankers can keep under their eye and direction .
but while the " big men " who used to write the tariffs and command the assistance of the treasury have been hostile,?all but a few with vision,?the average business man knows that he has been delivered , and that the fear that was once every day in his heart , that the men who controlled credit and directed enterprise from the committee rooms of congress would crush him , is there no more , and will not return,?unless the party that consulted only the " big men " should return to power,?the party of masterly inactivity and cunning resourcefulness in standing pat to resist change .
the republican party is just the party that can not meet the new conditions of a new age .
it does not know the way and it does not wish new conditions .
it tried to break away from the old leaders and could not .
they still select its candidates and dictate its policy , still resist change , still hanker after the old conditions , still know no methods of encouraging business but the old methods .
when it changes its leaders and its purposes and brings its ideas up to date it will have the right to ask the american people to give it power again ; but not until then .
a new age , an age of revolutionary change , needs new purposes and new ideas .
in foreign affairs we have been guided by principles clearly conceived and consistently lived up to .
perhaps they have not been fully comprehended because they have hitherto governed international affairs only in theory , not in practice .
they are simple , obvious , easily stated , and fundamental to american ideals .
we have been neutral not only because it was the fixed and traditional policy of the united states to stand aloof from the politics of europe and because we had had no part either of action or of policy in the influences which brought on the present war , but also because it was manifestly our duty to prevent , if it were possible , the indefinite extension of the fires of hate and desolation kindled by that terrible conflict and seek to serve mankind by reserving cur strength and our resources for the anxious and difficult days of restoration and healing which must follow , when peace will have to build its house anew .
the rights of our own citizens of course became involved : that was inevitable .
where they did this was our guiding principle : that property rights can be vindicated by claims for damages and no modern nation can decline to arbitrate such claims ; but the fundamental rights of humanity can not be .
the loss of life is irreparable .
neither can direct violations of a nation 's sovereignty await vindication in suits for damages .
the nation that violates these essential rights must expect to be checked and called to account by direct challenge and resistance .
it at once makes the quarrel in part our own .
these are plain principles and we have never lost sight of them or departed from them , whatever the stress or the perplexity of circumstance or the provocation to hasty resentment .
the record is clear and consistent throughout and stands distinct and definite for anyone to judge who wishes to know the truth about it .
the seas were not broad enough to keep the infection of the conflict out of our own politics .
the passions and intrigues of certain active groups and combinations of men amongst us who were born under foreign flags injected the poison of disloyalty into our own most critical affairs , laid violent hands upon many of our industries , and subjected us to the shame of divisions of sentiment and purpose in which america was contemned and forgotten .
it is part of the business of this year of reckoning and settlement to speak plainly and act with unmistakable purpose in rebuke of these things , in order that they may be forever hereafter impossible .
i am the candidate of a party , but i am above all things else an american citizen .
i neither seek the favor nor fear the displeasure of that small alien element amongst us which puts loyalty to any foreign power before loyalty to the united states .
while europe was at war our own continent , one of our own neighbors , was shaken by revolution .
in that matter , too , principle was plain and it was imperative that we should live up to it if we were to deserve the trust of any real partisan of the right as free men see it .
we have professed to believe , and we do believe , that the people of small and weak states have the right to expect to be dealt with exactly as the people of big and powerful states would be .
we have acted upon that principle in dealing with the people of mexico .
our recent pursuit of bandits into mexican territory was no violation of that principle .
we ventured to enter mexican territory only because there were no military forces in mexico that could protect our border from hostile attack and our own people from violence , and we have committed there no single act of hostility or interference even with the sovereign authority of the republic of mexico herself .
it was a plain case of the violation of our own sovereignty which could not wait to be vindicated by damages and for which there was no other remedy .
the authorities of mexico were powerless to prevent it .
many serious wrongs against the property , many irreparable wrongs against the persons of americans have been committed within the territory of mexico herself during this confused revolution , wrongs which could not be effectually checked so long as there was no constituted power in mexico which was in a position to check them .
we could not act directly in that matter ourselves without denying mexicans the right to any revolution at all which disturbed us and making the emancipation of her own people await our own interest and convenience .
for it is their emancipation that they are seeking,?blindly , it may be , and as yet ineffectually , but with profound and passionate purpose and within their unquestionable right , apply what true american principle you will,?any principle that an american would publicly avow .
the people of mexico have not been suffered to own their own country or direct their own institutions .
outsiders , men out of other nations and with interests too often alien to their own , have dictated what their privileges and opportunities should be and who should control their land , their lives , and their resources,?some of them americans , pressing for things they could never have got in their own country .
the mexican people are entitled to attempt their liberty from such influences ; and so long as i have anything to do with the action of our great government i shall do everything in my power to prevent anyone standing in their way .
i know that this is hard for some persons to understand ; but it is not hard for the plain people of the united states to understand .
it is hard doctrine only for those who wish to get something for themselves out of mexico .
there are men , and noble women , too , not a few , of our own people , thank god !
whose fortunes are invested in great properties in mexico who yet see the case with true vision and assess its issues with true american feeling .
the rest can be left for the present out of the reckoning until this enslaved people has had its day of struggle towards the light .
i have heard no one who was free from such influences propose interference by the united states with the internal affairs of mexico .
certainly no friend of the mexican people has proposed it .
the people of the united states are capable of great sympathies and a noble pity in dealing with problems of this kind .
as their spokesman and representative , i have tried to act in the spirit they would wish me show .
the people of mexico are striving for the rights that are fundamental to life and happiness,?15,000,000 oppressed men , overburdened women , and pitiful children in virtual bondage in their own home of fertile lands and inexhaustible treasure !
some of the leaders of the revolution may often have been mistaken and violent and selfish , but the revolution itself was inevitable and is right .
the unspeakable huerta betrayed the very comrades he served , traitorously overthrew the government of which he was a trusted part , impudently spoke for the very forces that had driven his people to the rebellion with which he had pretended to sympathize .
the men who overcame him and drove him out represent at least the fierce passion of reconstruction which lies at the very heart of liberty ; and so long as they represent , however imperfectly , such a struggle for deliverance , i am ready to serve their ends when i can .
so long as the power of recognition rests with me the government of the united states will refuse to extend the hand of welcome to any one who obtains power in a sister republic by treachery and violence .
no permanency can be given the affairs of any republic by a title based upon intrigue and assassination .
i declared that to be the policy of this administration within three weeks after i assumed the presidency .
i here again vow it .
i am more interested in the fortunes of oppressed men and pitiful women and children than in any property rights whatever .
mistakes i have no doubt made in this perplexing business , but not in purpose or object .
more is involved than the immediate destinies of mexico and the relations of the united states with a distressed and distracted people .
all america looks on .
test is now being made of us whether we be sincere lovers of popular liberty or not and are indeed to be trusted to respect national sovereignty among our weaker neighbors .
we have undertaken these many years to play big brother to the republics of this hemisphere .
this is the day of our test whether we mean , or have ever meant , to play that part for our own benefit wholly or also for theirs .
upon the outcome of that test ( its outcome in their minds , not in ours ) depends every relationship of the united states with latin america , whether in politics or in commerce and enterprise .
these are great issues and lie at the heart of the gravest tasks of the future , tasks both economic and political and very intimately inwrought with many of the most vital of the new issues of the politics of the world .
the republics of america have in the last three years been drawing together in a new spirit of accommodation , mutual understanding , and cordial cooperation .
much of the politics of the world in the years to come will depend upon their relationships with one another .
it is a barren and provincial statesmanship that loses sight of such things !
the future , the immediate future , will bring us squarely face to face with many great and exacting problems which will search us through and through whether we be able and ready to play the part in the world that we mean to play .
it will not bring us into their presence slowly , gently , with ceremonious introduction , but suddenly and at once , the moment the war in europe is over .
they will be new problems , most of them ; many will be old problems in a new setting and with new elements which we have never dealt with or reckoned the force and meaning of before .
they will require for their solution new thinking , fresh courage and resourcefulness , and in some matters radical reconsiderations of policy .
we must be ready to mobilize our resources alike of brains and of materials .
it is not a future to be afraid of .
it is , rather , a future to stimulate and excite us to the display of the best powers that are in us .
we may enter it with confidence when we are sure that we understand it,?and we have provided ourselves already with the means of understanding it .
look first at what it will be necessary that the nations of the world should do to make the days to come tolerable and fit to live and work in ; and then look at our part in what is to follow and our own duty of preparation .
for we must be prepared both in resources and in policy .
there must be a just and settled peace , and we here in america must contribute the full force of our enthusiasm and of our authority as a nation to the organization of that peace upon world - wide foundations that can not easily be shaken .
no nation should be forced to take sides in any quarrel in which its own honor and integrity and the fortunes of its own people are not involved ; but no nation can any longer remain neutral as against any wilful disturbance of the peace of the world .
the effects of war can no longer be confined to the areas of battle .
no nation stands wholly apart in interest when the life and interests of all nations are thrown into confusion and peril .
if hopeful and generous enterprise is to be renewed , if the healing and helpful arts of life are indeed to be revived when peace comes again , a new atmosphere of justice and friendship must be generated by means the world has never tried before .
the nations of the world must unite in joint guarantees that whatever is done to disturb the whole world 's life must first be tested in the court of the whole world 's opinion before it is attempted .
these are the new foundations the world must build for itself , and we must play our part in the reconstruction , generously and without too much thought of our separate interests .
we must make ourselves ready to play it intelligently , vigorously , and well .
one of the contributions we must make to the world 's peace is this : we must see to it that the people in our insular possessions are treated in their own lands as we would treat them here , and make the rule of the united states mean the same thing everywhere,?the same justice , the same consideration for the essential rights of men .
besides contributing our ungrudging moral and practical support to the establishment of peace throughout the world we must actively and intelligently prepare ourselves to do our full service in the trade and industry which are to sustain and develop the life of the nations in the days to come .
we have already been provident in this great matter and supplied ourselves with the instrumentalities of prompt adjustment .
we have created , in the federal trade commission , a means of inquiry and of accommodation in the field of commerce which ought both to coordinate the enterprises of our traders and manufacturers and to remove the barriers of misunderstanding and of a too technical interpretation of the law .
in the new tariff commission we have added another instrumentality of observation and adjustment which promises to be immediately serviceable .
the trade commission substitutes counsel and accommodation for the harsher processes of legal restraint , and the tariff commission ought to substitute facts for prejudices and theories .
our exporters have for some time had the advantage of working in the new light thrown upon foreign markets and opportunities of trade by the intelligent inquiries and activities of the bureau of foreign and domestic commerce which the democratic congress so wisely created in 1912 .
the tariff commission completes the machinery by which we shall be enabled to open up our legislative policy to the facts as they develop .
we can no longer indulge our traditional provincialism .
we are to play a leading part in the world drama whether we wish it or not .
we shall lend , not borrow ; act for ourselves , not imitate or follow ; organize and initiate , not peep about merely to see where we may get in .
we have already formulated and agreed upon a policy of law which will explicitly remove the ban now supposed to rest upon cooperation amongst our exporters in seeking and securing their proper place in the markets of the world .
the field will be free , the instrumentalities at hand .
it will only remain for the masters of enterprise amongst us to act in energetic concert , and for the government of the united states to insist upon the maintenance throughout the world of those conditions of fairness and of even - handed justice in the commercial dealings of the nations with one another upon which , after all , in the last analysis , the peace and ordered life of the world must ultimately depend .
at home also we must see to it that the men who plan and develop and direct our business enterprises shall enjoy definite and settled conditions of law , a policy accommodated to the freest progress .
we have set the just and necessary limits .
we have put all kinds of unfair competition under the ban and penalty of the law .
we have barred monopoly .
these fatal and ugly things being excluded , we must now quicken action and facilitate enterprise by every just means within our choice .
there will be peace in the business world , and , with peace , revived confidence and life .
we ought both to husband and to develop our natural resources , our mines , our forests , our water power .
i wish we could have made more progress than we have made in this vital matter ; and i call once more , with the deepest earnestness and solicitude , upon the advocates of a careful and provident conservation , on the one hand , and the advocates of a free and inviting field for private capital , on the other , to get together in a spirit of genuine accommodation and agreement and set this great policy forward at once .
we must hearten and quicken the spirit and efficiency of labor throughout our whole industrial system by everywhere and in all occupations doing justice to the laborer , not only by paying a living wage but also by making all the conditions that surround labor what they ought to be .
and we must do more than justice .
we must safeguard life and promote health and safety in every occupation in which they are threatened or imperilled .
that is more than justice , and better , because it is humanity and economy .
we must coordinate the railway systems of the country for national use , and must facilitate and promote their development with a view to that coordination and to their better adaptation as a whole to the life and trade and defense of the nation .
the life and industry of the country can be free and unhampered only if these arteries are open , efficient , and complete .
thus shall we stand ready to meet the future as circumstance and international policy effect their unfolding , whether the changes come slowly or come fast and without preface .
i have not spoken explicitly , gentlemen , of the platform adopted at st. louis ; but it has been implicit in all that i have said .
i have sought to interpret its spirit and meaning .
the people of the united states do not need to be assured now that that platform is a definite pledge , a practical program .
we have proved to them that our promises are made to be kept .
we hold very definite ideals .
we believe that the energy and initiative of our people have been too narrowly coached and superintended ; that they should be set free , as we have set them free , to disperse themselves throughout the nation ; that they should not be concentrated in the hands of a few powerful guides and guardians , as our opponents have again and again , in effect if not in purpose , sought to concentrate them .
we believe , moreover,?who that looks about him now with comprehending eye can fail to believe??that the day of little americanism , with its narrow horizons , when methods of " protection " and industrial nursing were the chief study of our provincial statesmen , are past and gone and that a day of enterprise has at last dawned for the united states whose field is the wide world .
we hope to see the stimulus of that new day draw all america , the republics of both continents , on to a new life and energy and initiative in the great affairs of peace .
we are americans for big america , and rejoice to look forward to the days in which america shall strive to stir the world without irritating it or drawing it on to new antagonisms , when the nations with which we deal shall at last come to see upon what deep foundations of humanity and justice our passion for peace rests , and when all mankind shall look upon our great people with a new sentiment of admiration , friendly rivalry and real affection , as upon a people who , though keen to succeed , seeks always to be at once generous and just and to whom humanity is dearer than profit or selfish power .
upon this record and in the faith of this purpose we go to the country .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 i sincerely regret that i can not be present at the opening of this session of the congress .
i am thus prevented from presenting in as direct a way as i could wish the many questions that are pressing for solution at this time .
happily , i have had the advantage of the advice of the heads of the several executive departments who have kept in close touch with affairs in their detail and whose thoughtful recommendations i earnestly second .
in the matter of the railroads and the readjustment of their affairs growing out of federal control , i shall take the liberty at a later date of addressing you .
i hope that congress will bring to a conclusion at this session legislation looking to the establishment of a budget system .
that there should be one single authority responsible for the making of all appropriations and that appropriations should be made not independently of each other , but with reference to one single comprehensive plan of expenditure properly related to the nation 's income , there can be no doubti believe the burden of preparing the budget must , in the nature of ' the case , if the work is to be properly done and responsibility concentrated instead of divided , rest upon the executive .
the budget so prepared should be submitted to and approved or amended by a single committee of each house of congress and no single appropriation should be made by the congress , except such as may have been included in the budget prepared by the executive or added by the particular committee of congress charged with the budget legislation .
another and not less important aspect of the problem is the ascertainment of the economy and efficiency with which the moneys appropriated are expended .
under existing law the only audit is for the purpose of ascertaining whether expenditures have been lawfully made within the appropriations .
no one is authorized or equipped to ascertain whether the money has been spent wisely , economically and effectively .
the auditors should be highly trained officials with permanent tenure in the treasury department , free of obligations to or motives of consideration for this or any subsequent administration , and authorized and empowered to examine into and make report upon the methods employed and the results obtained by the executive departments of the government .
their reports should be made to the congress and to the secretary of the treasury .
i trust that the congress will give its immediate consideration to the problem of future taxation .
simplification of the income and profits taxes has become an immediate necessity .
these taxes performed indispensable service during the war .
they must , however , be simplified , not only to save the taxpayer inconvenience and expense , but in order that his liability may be made certain and definite .
with reference to the details of the revenue law , the secretary of the treasury and the commissioner of internal revenue will lay before you for your consideration certain amendments necessary or desirable in connection with the administration of the law - recommendations which have my approval and support .
it is of the utmost importance that in dealing with this matter the present law should not be disturbed so far as regards taxes for the calendar year 1920 payable in the calendar year 1921 .
the congress might well consider whether the higher rates of income and profits taxes can in peace times be effectively productive of revenue , and whether they may not , on the contrary , be destructive of business activity and productive of waste and inefficiency .
there is a point at which in peace times high rates of income and profits taxes discourage energy , remove the incentive to new enterprises , encourage extravagant expenditures and produce industrial stagnation with consequent unemployment and other attendant evils .
the problem is not an easy one .
a fundamental change has taken place with reference to the position of america in the world 's affairs .
the prejudice and passions engendered by decades of controversy between two schools of political and economic thought ,- the one believers in protection of american industries , the other believers in tariff for revenue only ,- must be sbordinated to the single consideration of the public interest in the light of utterly changed conditions .
before the war america was heavily the debtor of the rest of the world and the interest payments she had to make to foreign countries on american securities held abroad , the expenditures of american travelers abroad and the ocean freight charges she had to pay to others , about balanced the value of her pre - war favorable balance of trade .
during the war america 's exports nave been greatly stimulated , and increased prices have increased their value .
on the other hand , she has purchased a large proportion of the american securities previously held abroad , has loaned some $ 9,000,000,000 to foreign governments , and has built her own ships .
our favorable balance of trade has thus been greatly increased and europe has been deprived of the means of meeting it heretofore existing .
europe can have only three ways of meeting the favorable balance of trade in peace times : by imports into this country of gold or of goods , or by establishing new credits .
europe is in no position at the present time to ship gold to us nor could we contemplate large further imports of gold into this country without concern .
the time has nearly passed for international governmental loans and it will take time to develop in this country a market for foreign securities .
anything , therefore , which would tend to prevent foreign countries from settling for our exports by shipments of goods into this country could only have the effect of preventing them from paying for our exports and therefore of preventing the exports from being made .
the productivity of the country , greatly stimulated by the war , must find an outlet by exports to foreign countries , and any measures taken to prevent imports will inevitably curtail exports , force curtailment of production , load the banking machinery of the country with credits to carry unsold products and produce industrial stagnation and unemployment .
if we want to sell , we must be prepared to buy .
whatever , therefore , may have been our views during the period of growth of american business concerning tariff legislation , we must now adjust our own economic life to a changed condition growing out of the fact that american business is full grown and that america is the greatest capitalist in the world .
no policy of isolation will satisfy the growing needs and opportunities of america .
the provincial standards and policies of the past , which have held american business as if in a strait - jacket , must yield and give way to the needs and exigencies of the new day in which we live , a day full of hope and promise for american business , if we will but take advantage of the opportunities that are ours for the asking .
the recent war has ended our isolation and thrown upon us a great duty and responsibility .
the united states must share the expanding world market .
the united states desires for itself only equal opportunity with the other nations of the world , and that through the process of friendly cooperation and fair competition the legitimate interests of the nations concerned may be successfully and equitably adjusted .
there are other matters of importance upon which i urged action at the last session of congress which are still pressing for solution .
i am sure it is not necessary for me again to remind you -that there is one immediate and very practicable question resulting from the war which we should meet in the most liberal spirit .
it is a matter of recognition and relief to our soldiers .
i can do no better than to quote from my last message urging this very action : 
 " we must see to it that our returning soldiers are assisted in every practicable way to find the places for which they are fitted in the daily work of the country .
this can be done by developing and maintaining upon an adequate scale the admirable organization created by the department of labor for placing men seeking work ; and it can also be done , in at least one very great field , by creating new opportunities for individual enterprise .
the secretary of the interior has pointed out the way by which returning soldiers may be helped to find and take up land in the hitherto undeveloped regions of the country which the federal government has already prepared , or can readily prepare , for cultivation and also on many of the cutover or neglected areas which lie within the limits of the older states ; and i once more take the liberty of recommending very urgently that his plans shall receive the immediate and substantial support of the congress . "
in the matter of tariff legislation , i beg to call your attention to the statements contained in my last message urging legislation with reference to the establishment of the chemical and dyestuffs industry in america : 
 " among the industries to which special consideration should be given is that of the manufacture of dyestuffs and related chemicals .
our complete dependence upon german supplies before the war made the interruption of trade a cause of exceptional economic disturbance .
the close relation between the manufacture of dyestuffs , on the one hand , and of explosive and poisonous gases , on the other , moreover , has given the industry an exceptional significance and value .
although the united states will gladly and unhesitatingly join in the programme of international disarmament , it will , nevertheless , be a policy of obvious prudence to make certain of the successful maintenance of many strong and well - equipped chemical plants .
the german chemical industry , with which we will be brought into competition , was -and may well be again , a thoroughly knit monopoly capable of exercising a competition of a peculiarly insidious and dangerous kind . "
during the war the farmer performed a vital and willing service to the nation .
by materially increasing the production of his land , he supplied america and the allies with the increased amounts of food necessary to keep their immense armies in the field .
he indispensably helped to win the war .
but there is now scarcely less need of increasing the production in food -and the necessaries of life .
i ask the congress to consider means of encouraging effort along these lines .
the importance of doing everything possible to promote production along economical lines , to improve marketing , and to make rural life more attractive and healthful , is obvious .
i would urge approval of the plans already proposed to the congress by the secretary of agriculture , to secure the essential facts required for the proper study of this question , through the proposed enlarged programmes for farm management studies and crop estimates .
i would urge , also , the continuance of federal participation in the building of good roads , under the terms of existing law and under the direction of present agencies ; the need of further action on the part of the states and the federal government to preserve and develop our forest resources , especially through the practice of better forestry methods on private holdings and the extension of the publicly owned forests ; better support for country schools and the more definite direction of their courses of study along lines related to rural problems ; and fuller provision for sanitation in rural districts and the building up of needed hospital and medical facilities in these localities .
perhaps the way might be cleared for many of these desirable reforms by a fresh , comprehensive survey made of rural conditions by a conference composed of representatives of the farmers and of the agricultural agencies responsible for leadership .
i would call your attention to the widespread condition of political restlessness in our body politic .
the causes of this unrest , while various and complicated , are superficial rather than deep - seated .
broadly , they arise from or are connected with the failure on the part of our government to arrive speedily at a just and permanent peace permitting return to normal conditions , from the transfusion of radical theories from seething european centers pending such delay , from heartless profiteering resulting in the increase of the cost of living , and lastly from the machinations of passionate and malevolent agitators .
with the return to normal conditions , this unrest will rapidly disappear .
in the meantime , it does much evil .
it seems to me that in dealing with this situation congress should not be impatient or drastic but should seek rather to remove the causes .
it should endeavor to bring our country back speedily to a peace basis , with ameliorated living conditions under the minimum of restrictions upon personal liberty that is consistent with our reconstruction problems .
and it should arm the federal government with power to deal in its criminal courts with those persons who by violent methods would abrogate our time - tested institutions .
with the free expression of opinion and with the advocacy of orderly political change , however fundamental , there must be no interference , but towards passion and malevolence tendine to incite crime and insurrection under guise of political evolution there should be no leniency .
legislation to this end has been recommended by the attorney general and should be enacted .
in this direct connection , i would call your attention to my recommendations on august 8th , pointing out legislative measures which wouldbe effective in controlling and bringing down the present cost of living , which contributes so largely to this unrest .
on only one of these recommendations has the congress acted .
if the government 's campaign is to be effective , it is necessary that the other steps suggested should be acted on at once .
i renew and strongly urge the necessity of the extension of the present food control act as to the period of time in which it shall remain in operation .
the attorney general has submitted a bill providing for an extension of this act for a period of six months .
as it now stands , it is limited in operation to the period of the war and becomes inoperative upon the formal proclamation of peace .
it is imperative that it should be extended at once .
the department of justice has built up extensive machinery for the purpose of enforcing its provisions ; all of which must be abandoned upon the conclusion of peace unless the provisions of this act are extended .
during this period the congress will have an opportunity to make similar permanent provisions and regulations with regard to all goods destined for interstate commerce and to exclude them from interstate shipment , if the requirements of the law are not compiled with .
some such regulation is imperatively necessary .
the abuses that have grown up in the manipulation of prices by the withholding of foodstuffs and other necessaries of life can not otherwise be effectively prevented .
there can be no doubt of either the necessity of the legitimacy of such measures .
as i pointed out in my last message , publicity can accomplish a great deal in this campaign .
the aims of the government must be clearly brought to the attention of the consuming public , civic organizations and state officials , who are in a position to lend their assistance to our efforts .
you have made available funds with which to carry on this campaign , but there is no provision in the law authorizing their expenditure for the purpose of making the public fully informed about the efforts of the government .
specific recommendation has been made by the attorney general in this regard .
i would strongly urge upon you its immediate adoption , as it constitutes one of the preliminary steps to this campaign .
i also renew my recommendation that the congress pass a law regulating cold storage as it is regulated , for example , by the laws of the state of new jersey , which limit the time during which goods may be kept in storage , prescribe the method of disposing of them if kept beyond the permitted period , and require that goods released from storage shall in all cases bear the date of their receipt .
it would materially add to the serviceability of the law , for the purpose we now have in view , if it were also prescribed that all goods released from storage for interstate shipment should have plainly marked upon each package the selling or market price at which they went into storage .
by this means the purchaser would always be able to learn what profits stood between him and the producer or the wholesale dealer .
i would also renew my recommendation that all goods destined for interstate commerce should in every case , where their form or package makes it possible , be plainly marked with the price at which they left the hands of the producer .
we should formulate a law requiring a federal license of all corporations engaged in interstate commerce and embodying in the license or in the conditions under which it is to be issued , specific regulations designed to secure competitive selling and prevent unconscionable profits in the method of marketing .
such a law would afford a welcome opportunity to effect other much needed reforms in the business of interstate shipment and in the methods of corporations which are engaged in it ; but for the moment i confine my recommendations to the object immediately in hand , which is to lower the cost of living .
no one who has observed the march of events in the last year can fail to note the absolute need of a definite programme to bring about an improvement in the conditions of labor .
there can be no settled conditions leading to increased production and a reduction in the cost of living if labor and capital are to be antagonists instead of partners .
sound thinking and an honest desire to serve the interests of the whole nation , as distinguished from the interests of a class , must be applied to the solution of this great and pressing problem .
the failure of other nations to consider this matter in a vigorous way has produced bitterness and jealousies and antagonisms , the food of radicalism .
the only way to keep men from agitating against grievances is to remove the grievances .
an unwillingness even to discuss these matters produces only dissatisfaction and gives comfort to the extreme elements in our country which endeavor to stir up disturbances in order to provoke governments to embark upon a course of retaliation and repression .
the seed of revolution is repression .
the remedy for these things must not be negative in character .
it must be constructive .
it must comprehend the general interest .
the real antidote for the unrest which manifests itself is not suppression , but a deep consideration of the wrongs that beset our national life and the application of a remedy .
congress has already shown its willingness to deal with these industrial wrongs by establishing the eight - hour day as the standard in every field of labor .
it has sought to find a way to prevent child labor .
it has served the whole country by leading the way in developing the means of preserving and safeguarding lives and health in dangerous industries .
it must now help in the difficult task of finding a method that will bring about a genuine democratization of industry , based upon the full recognition of the right of those who work , in whatever rank , to participate in some organic way in every decision which directly affects their welfare .
it is with this purpose in mind that i called a conference to meet in washington on december 1st , to consider these problems in all their broad aspects , with the idea of bringing about a better understanding between these two interests .
the great unrest throughout the world , out of which has emerged a demand for an immediate consideration of the difficulties between capital and labor , bids us put our own house in order .
frankly , there can be no permanent and lasting settlements between capital and labor which do not recognize the fundamental concepts for which labor has been struggling through the years .
the whole world gave its recognition and endorsement to these fundamental purposes in the league of nations .
the statesmen gathered at versailles recognized the fact that world stability could not be had by reverting to industrial standards and conditions against which the average workman of the world had revolted .
it is , therefore , the task of the statesmen of this new day of change and readjustment to recognize world conditions and to seek to bring about , through legislation , conditions that will mean the ending of age - long antagonisms between capital and labor and that will hopefully lead to the building up of a comradeship which will result not only in greater contentment among the mass of workmen but also bring about a greater production and a greater prosperity to business itself .
to analyze the particulars in the demands of labor is to admit the justice of their complaint in many matters that lie at their basis .
the workman demands an adequate wage , sufficient to permit him to live in comfort , unhampered by the fear of poverty and want in his old age .
he demands the right to live and the right to work amidst sanitary surroundings , both in home and in workshop , surroundings that develop and do not retard his own health and wellbeing ; and the right to provide for his children 's wants in the matter of health and education .
in other words , it is his desire to make the conditions of his life and the lives of those dear to him tolerable and easy to bear .
the establishment of the principles regarding labor laid down in the covenant of the league of nations offers us the way to industrial peace and conciliation .
no other road lies open to us .
not to pursue this one is longer to invite enmities , bitterness , and antagonisms which in the end only lead to industrial and social disaster .
the unwilling workman is not a profitable servant .
an employee whose industrial life is hedged about by hard and unjust conditions , which he did not create and over which he has no control , lacks that fine spirit of enthusiasm and volunteer effort which are the necessary ingredients of a great producing entity .
let us be frank about this solemn matter .
the evidences of world - wide unrest which manifest themselves in violence throughout the world bid us pause and consider the means to be found to stop the spread of this contagious thing before it saps the very vitality of the nation itself .
do we gain strength by withholding the remedy ?
or is it not the business of statesmen to treat these manifestations of unrest which meet us on every hand as evidences of an economic disorder and to apply constructive remedies wherever necessary , being sure that in the application of the remedy we touch not the vital tissues of our industrial and economic life ?
there can be no recession of the tide of unrest until constructive instrumentalities are set up to stem that tide .
governments must recognize the right of men collectively to bargain for humane objects that have at their base the mutual protection and welfare of those engaged in all industries .
labor must not be longer treated as a commodity .
it must be regarded as the activity of human beings , possessed of deep yearnings and desires .
the busi ness man gives his best thought to the repair and replenishment of his machinery , so that its usefulness will not be impaired and its power to produce may always be at its height and kept in full vigor and motion .
no less regard ought to be paid to the human machine , which after all propels the machinery of the world and is the great dynamic force that lies back of all industry and progress .
return to the old standards of wage and industry in employment are unthinkable .
the terrible tragedy of war which has just ended and which has brought the world to the verge of chaos and disaster would be in vain if there should ensue a return to the conditions of the past .
europe itself , whence has come the unrest which now holds the world at bay , is an example of standpatism in these vital human matters which america might well accept as an example , not to be followed but studiously to be avoided .
europe made labor the differential , and the price of it all is enmity and antagonism and prostrated industry , the right of labor to live in peace and comfort must be recognized by governments and america should be the first to lay the foundation stones upon which industrial peace shall be built .
labor not only is entitled to an adequate wage , but capital should receive a reasonable return upon its investment and is entitled to protection at the hands of the government in every emergency .
no government worthy of the name can " play " these elements against each other , for there is a mutuality of interest between them which the government must seek to express and to safeguard at all cost .
the right of individuals to strike is inviolate and ought not to be interfered with by any process of government , but there is a predominant right and that is the right of the government to protect all of its people and to assert its power and majesty against the challenge of any class .
the government , when it asserts that right , seeks not to antagonize a class but simply to defend the right of the whole people as against the irreparable harm and injury that might be done by the attempt by any class to usurp a power that only government itself has a right to exercise as a protection to all .
in the matter of international disputes which have led to war , statesmen have sought to set up as a remedy arbitration for war .
does this not point the way for the settlement of industrial disputes , by the establishment of a tribunal , fair and just alike to all , which will settle industrial disputes which in the past have led to war and disaster ?
america , witnessing the evil consequences which have followed out of such disputes between these contending forces , must not admit itself impotent to deal with these matters by means of peaceful processes .
surely , there must be some method of bringing together in a council of peace and amity these two great interests , out of which will come a happier day of peace and cooperation , a day that will make men more hopeful and enthusiastic in their various tasks , that will make for more comfort and happiness in living and a more tolerable condition among all classes of men .
certainly human intelligence can devise some acceptable tribunal for adjusting the differences between capital and labor .
this is the hour of test and trial for america .
by her prowess and strength , and the indomitable courage of her soldiers , she demonstrated her power to vindicate on foreign battlefields her conceptions of liberty and justice .
let not her influence as a mediator between capital and labor be weakened and her own failure to settle matters of purely domestic concern be proclaimed to the world .
there are those in this country who threaten direct action to force their will , upon a majority .
russia today , with its blood and terror , is a painful object lesson of the power of minorities .
it makes little difference what minority it is ; whether capital or labor , or any other class ; no sort of privilege will ever be permitted to dominate this country .
we are a partnership or nothing that is worth while .
we are a democracy , where the majority are the masters , or all the hopes and purposes of the men who founded this government have been defeated and forgotten .
in america there is but one way by which great reforms can be accomplished and the relief sought by classes obtained , and that is through the orderly processes of representative government .
those who would propose any other method of reform are enemies of this country .
america will not be daunted by threats nor lose her composure or calmness in these distressing times .
we can afford , in the midst of this day of passion and unrest , to be self - contained and sure .
the instrument of all reform in america is the ballot .
the road to economic and social reform in america is the straight road of justice to all classes and conditions of men .
men have but to follow this road to realize the full fruition of their objects and purposes .
let those beware who would take the shorter road of disorder and revolution .
the right road is the road of justice and orderly process .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 eight months have elapsed since i last had the honor of addressing you .
they have been months crowded with events of immense and grave significance for us .
i shall not undertake to detail or even to summarize those events .
the practical particulars of the part we have played in them will be laid before you in the reports of the executive departments .
i shall discuss only our present outlook upon these vast affairs , our present duties , and the immediate means of accomplishing the objects we shall hold always in view .
i shall not go back to debate the causes of the war .
the intolerable wrongs done and planned against us by the sinister masters of germany have long since become too grossly obvious and odious to every true american to need to be rehearsed .
but i shall ask you to consider again and with a very grave scrutiny our objectives and the measures by which we mean to attain them ; for the purpose of discussion here in this place is action , and our action must move straight toward definite ends .
our object is , of course , to win the war ; and we shall not slacken or suffer ourselves to he diverted until it is won .
but it is worth while asking and answering the question , when shall we consider the war won ?
from one point of view it is not necessary to broach this fundamental matter .
i do not doubt that the american people know what the war is about and what sort of an outcome they will regard as a realization of their purpose in it .
as a nation we are united in spirit and intention .
i pay little heed to those who tell me otherwise .
i hear the voices of dissent - who does not ?
i bear the criticism and the clamor of the noisily thoughtless and troublesome .
i also see men here and there fling themselves in impotent disloyalty against the calm , indomitable power of the nation .
i hear men debate peace who understand neither its nature nor the way in which we may attain it with uplifted eyes and unbroken spirits .
but i know that none of these speaks for the nation .
they do not touch the heart of anything .
they may safely be left to strut their uneasy hour and be forgotten .
but from another point of view i believe that it is necessary to say plainly what we here at the seat of action consider the war to be for and what part we mean to play in the settlement of its searching issues .
we are the spokesmen of the american people , and they have a right to know whether their purpose is ours .
they desire peace by the overcoming of evil , by the defeat once for all of the sinister forces that interrupt peace and render it impossible , and they wish to know how closely our thought runs with theirs and what action we propose .
they are impatient with those who desire peace by any sort of compromisedeeply and indignantly impatient - but they will be equally impatient with us if we do not make it plain to them what our objectives are and what we are planning for in seeking to make conquest of peace by arms .
i believe that i speak for them when i say two things : first , that this intolerable thing of which the masters of germany have shown us the ugly face , this menace of combined intrigue and force which we now see so clearly as the german power , a thing without conscience or honor of capacity for covenanted peace , must be crushed and , if it be not utterly brought to an end , at least shut out from the friendly intercourse of the nations ; and second , that when this thing and its power are indeed defeated and the time comes that we can discuss peace when the german people have spokesmen whose word we can believe and when those spokesmen are ready in the name of their people to accept the common judgment of the nations as to what shall henceforth be the bases of law and of covenant for the life of the world - we shall be willing and glad to pay the full price for peace , and pay it ungrudgingly .
we know what that price will be .
it will be full , impartial justice - justice done at every point and to every nation that the final settlement must affect , our enemies as well as our friends .
you catch , with me , the voices of humanity that are in the air .
they grow daily more audible , more articulate , more persuasive , and they come from the hearts of men everywhere .
they insist that the war shall not end in vindictive action of any kind ; that no nation or people shall be robbed or punished because the irresponsible rulers of a single country have themselves done deep and abominable wrong .
it is this thought that has been expressed in the formula , " no annexations , no contributions , no punitive indemnities . "
just because this crude formula .
expresses the instinctive judgment as to right of plain men everywhere , it has been made diligent use of by the masters of german intrigue to lead the people of russia astrayand the people of every other country their agents could reach - in order that a premature peace might be brought about before autocracy has been taught its final and convincing lesson and the people of the world put in control of their own destinies .
but the fact that a wrong use has been made of a just idea is no reason why a right use should not be made of it .
it ought to be brought under the patronage of its real friends .
let it be said again that autocracy must first be shown the utter futility of its claim to power or leadership in the modern world .
it is impossible to apply any standard of justice so long as such forces are unchecked and undefeated as the present masters of germany command .
not until that has been done can right be set up as arbiter and peacemaker among the nations .
but when that has been done - as , god willing , it assuredly will be - we shall at last be free to do an unprecedented thing , and this is the time to avow our purpose to do it .
we shall be free to base peace on generosity and justice , to the exclusions of all selfish claims to advantage even on the part of the victors .
let there be no misunderstanding .
our present and immediate task is to win the war and nothing shall turn us aside from from it until it is accomplished .
every power and resource we possess , whether of men , of money , or of materials , is being devoted and will continue to be devoted to that purpose until it is achieved .
those who desire to bring peace about before that purpose is achieved i counsel to carry their advice elsewhere .
we will not entertain it .
we shall regard the war as won only when the german people say to us , through properly accredited representatives , that they are ready to agree to a settlement based upon justice and reparation of the wrongs their rulers have done .
they have done a wrong to belgium which must be repaired .
they have established a power over other lands and peoples than their own -- over the great empire of austria - hungary , over hitherto free balkan states , over turkey and within asia - which must be relinquished .
germany 's success by skill , by industry , by knowledge , by enterprise we did not grudge or oppose , but admired , rather .
she had built up for herself a real empire of trade and influence , secured by the peace of the world .
we were content to abide by the rivalries of manufacture , science and commerce that were involved for us in her success , and stand or fall as we had or did not have the brains and the initiative to surpass her .
but at the moment when she had conspicuously won her triumphs of peace she threw them away , to establish in their stead what the world will no longer permit to be established , military and political domination by arms , by which to oust where she could not excel the rivals she most feared and hated .
the peace we make must remedy that wrong .
it must deliver the once fair lands and happy peoples of belgium and northern france from the prussian conquest and the prussian menace , but it must deliver also the peoples of austria - hungary , the peoples of the balkans and the peoples of turkey , alike in europe and asia , from the impudent and alien dominion of the prussian military and commercial autocracy .
we owe it , however , to ourselves , to say that we do not wish in any way to impair or to rearrange the austrohungarian empire .
it is no affair of ours what they do with their own life , either industrially or politically .
we do not purpose or desire to dictate to them in any way .
we only desire to see that their affairs are left in their own hands , in all matters , great or small .
we shall hope to secure for the peoples of the balkan peninsula and for the people of the turkish empire the right and opportunity to make their own lives safe , their own fortunes secure against oppression or injustice and from the dictation of foreign courts or parties .
and our attitude and purpose with regard to germany herself are of a like kind .
we intend no wrong against the german empire , no interference with her internal affairs .
we should deem either the one or the other absolutely unjustifiable , absolutely contrary to the principles we have professed to live by and to hold most sacred throughout our life as a nation .
the people of germany are being told by the men whom they now permit to deceive them and to act as their masters that they are fighting for the very life and existence of their empire , a war of desperate self defense against deliberate aggression .
nothing could be more grossly or wantonly false , and we must seek by the utmost openness and candor as to our real aims to convince them of its falseness .
we are in fact fighting for their emancipation from the fear , along with our own - from the fear as well as from the fact of unjust attack by neighbors or rivals or schemers after world empire .
no one is threatening the existence or the independence of the peaceful enterprise of the german empire .
the worst that can happen to the detriment the german people is this , that if they should still , after the war is over , continue to be obliged to live under ambitious and intriguing masters interested to disturb the peace of the world , men or classes of men whom the other peoples of the world could not trust , it might be impossible to admit them to the partnership of nations which must henceforth guarantee the world 's peace .
that partnership must be a partnership of peoples , not a mere partnership of governments .
it might be impossible , also , in such untoward circumstances , to admit germany to the free economic intercourse which must inevitably spring out of the other partnerships of a real peace .
but there would be no aggression in that ; and such a situation , inevitable , because of distrust , would in the very nature of things sooner or later cure itself , by processes which would assuredly set in .
the wrongs , the very deep wrongs , committed in this war will have to be righted .
that , of course .
but they can not and must not be righted by the commission of similar wrongs against germany and her allies .
the world will not permit the commission of similar wrongs as a means of reparation and settlement .
statesmen must by this time have learned that the opinion of the world is everywhere wide awake and fully comprehends the issues involved .
no representative of any self - governed nation will dare disregard it by attempting any such covenants of selfishness and compromise as were entered into at the congress of vienna .
the thought of the plain people here and everywhere throughout the world , the people who enjoy no privilege and have very simple and unsophisticated standards of right and wrong , is the air all governments must henceforth breathe if they would live .
it is in the full disclosing light of that thought that all policies must be received and executed in this midday hour of the world 's life .
ger .
man rulers have been able to upset the peace of the world only because the german people were not suffered under their tutelage to share the comradeship of the other peoples of the world either in thought or in purpose .
they were allowed to have no opinion of their own which might be set up as a rule of conduct for those who exercised authority over them .
but the congress that concludes this war will feel the full strength of the tides that run now in the hearts and consciences of free men everywhere .
its conclusions will run with those tides .
all those things have been true from the very beginning of this stupendous war ; and i can not help thinking that if they had been made plain at the very outset the sympathy and enthusiasm of the russian people might have been once for all enlisted on the side of the allies , suspicion and distrust swept away , and a real and lasting union of purpose effected .
had they believed these things at the very moment of their revolution , and had they been confirmed in that belief since , the sad reverses which have recently marked the progress of their affairs towards an ordered and stable government of free men might have been avoided .
the russian people have been poisoned by the very same falsehoods that have kept the german people in the dark , and the poison has been , administered by the very same hand .
the only possible antidote is the truth .
it can not be uttered too plainly or too often .
from every point of view , therefore , it has seemed to be my duty to speak these declarations of purpose , to add these specific interpretations to what i took the liberty of saying to the senate in january .
our entrance into the war has not altered out attitude towards the settlement that must come when it is over .
when i said in january that the nations of the world were entitled not only to free pathways upon the sea , but also to assured and unmolested access to those - pathways , i was thinking , and i am thinking now , not of the smaller and weaker nations alone which need our countenance and support , but also of the great and powerful nations and of our present enemies as well as our present associates in the war .
i was thinking , and am thinking now , of austria herself , among the rest , as well as of serbia and of poland .
justice and equality of rights can be had only at a great price .
we are seeking permanent , not temporary , foundations for the peace of the world , and must seek them candidly and fearlessly .
as always , the right will prove to be the expedient .
what shall we do , then , to push this great war of freedom and justice to its righteous conclusion ?
we must clear away with a thorough hand all impediments to success , and we must make every adjustment of law that will facilitate the full and free use of our whole capacity and force as a fighting unit .
one very embarrassing obstacle that stands hi our way is that we are at war with germany but not with her allies .
i , therefore , very earnestly recommend that the congress immediately declare the united states in a state of war with austria - hungary .
does it seem strange to you that this should be the conclusion of the argument i have just addressed to you ?
it is not .
it is in fact the inevitable logic of what i have said .
austria - hungary is for the time being not her own mistress but simply the vassal of the german government .
we must face the facts as they are and act upon them without sentiment in this stern business .
the government of austria and hungary is not acting upon its own initiative or in response to the wishes and feelings of its own peoples , but as the instrument of another nation .
we must meet its force with our own and regard the central powers as but one .
the war can be successfully conducted in no other way .
the same logic would lead also to a declaration of war against turkey and bulgaria .
they also are the tools of germany , but they are mere tools and do not yet stand in the direct path of our necessary action .
we shall go wherever the necessities of this war carry us , but it seems to me that we should go only where immediate and practical considerations lead us , and not heed any others .
the financial and military measures which must be adopted will suggest themselves as the war and its undertakings develop , but i will take the liberty of proposing to you certain other acts of legislation which seem to me to be needed for the support of the war and for the release of our whole force and energy .
it will be necessary to extend in certain particulars the legislation of the last session with regard to alien enemies , and also necessary , i believe , to create a very definite and particular control over the entrance and departure of all persons into and from the united states .
legislation should be enacted defining as a criminal offense every wilful violation of the presidential proclamation relating to alien enemies promulgated under section 4067 of the revised statutes and providing appropriate punishments ; and women , as well as men , should be included under the terms of the acts placing restraints upon alien enemies .
it is likely that as time goes on many alien enemies will be willing to be fed and housed at the expense of the government in the detention camps , and it would be the purpose of the legislation i have suggested to confine offenders among them in the penitentiaries and other similar institutions where they could be made to work as other criminals do .
recent experience has convinced me that the congress must go further in authorizing the government to set limits to prices .
the law of supply and demand , i am sorry to say , has been- replaced by the law of unrestrained selfishness .
while we have eliminated profiteering in several branches of industry , it still runs impudently rampant in others .
the farmers for example , complain with a great deal of justice that , while the regulation of food prices restricts their incomes , no restraints are placed upon the prices of most of the things they must themselves purchase ; and similar inequities obtain on all sides .
it is imperatively necessary that the consideration of the full use of the water power of the country , and also of the consideration of the systematic and yet economical development of such of the natural resources of the country as are still under the control of the federal government should be immediately resumed and affirmatively and con .
structively dealt with at the earliest possible moment .
the pressing need of such legislation is daily becoming more obvious .
the legislation proposed at the last session with regard to regulated combinations among our exporters in order to provide for our foreign trade a more effective organization and method of co - operation ought by all means to be completed at this session .
and i beg that the members of the house of representatives will permit me to express the opinion that it will be impossible to deal in any but a very wasteful and extravagant fashion with the enormous appropriations of the public moneys which must continue to be made if the war is to be properly sustained , unless the house will consent to return to its former practice of initiating and preparing all appropriation bills through a single committee , in order that responsibility may be centered , expenditures standardized and made uniform , and waste and duplication as much as possible avoided .
additional legislation may also become necessary before the present congress again adjourns in order to effect the most efficient co - ordination and operation of the railways and other transportation systems of the country ; but to that i shall , if circumstances should demand , call the attention of congress upon another occasion .
if i have overlooked anything that ought to be done for the more effective conduct of the war , your own counsels will supply the omission .
what i am perfectly clear about is that in the present session of the congress our whole attention and energy should be concentrated on the vigorous , rapid and successful prosecution of the great task of winning the war .
we can do this with all the greater zeal and enthusiasm because we know that for us this is a war of high principle , debased by no selfish ambition of conquest or spoiliation ; because we know , and all the world knows , that we have been forced into it to save the very institutions we five under from corruption and destruction .
the purpose of the central powers strikes straight at the very heart of everything we believe in ; their methods of warfare outrage every principle of humanity and of knightly honor ; their intrigue has corrupted the very thought and spirit of many of our people ; their sinister and secret diplomacy has sought to take our very territory away from us and disrupt the union of the states .
our safety would be at an end , our honor forever sullied and brought into contempt , were we to permit their triumph .
they are striking at the very existence of democracy and liberty .
it is because it is for us a war of high , disinterested purpose , in which all the free peoples of the world are banded together for the vindication of right , a war for the preservation of our nation , of all that it has held dear , of principle and of purpose , that we feel ourselves doubly constrained to propose for its outcome only that which is righteous and of irreproachable intention , for our foes as well as for our friends .
the cause being just and holy , the settlement must be of like motive and equality .
for this we can fight , but for nothing less noble or less worthy of our traditions .
for this cause we entered the war and for this cause will we battle until the last gun is fired .
i have spoken plainly because this seems to me the time when it is most necessary to speak plainly , in order that all the world may know that , even in the heat and ardor of the struggle and when our whole thought is of carrying the war through to its end , we have not forgotten any ideal or principle for which the name of america has been held in honor among the nations and for which it has been our glory to contend in the great generations that went before us .
a supreme moment of history has come .
the eyes of the people have been opened and they see .
the hand of god is laid upon the nations .
he will show them favor , i devoutly believe , only if they rise to the clear heights of his own justice and mercy .

gentlemen of the senate : 
 on the eighteenth of december last i addressed an identic note to the governments of the nations now at war requesting them to state , more definitely than they had yet been stated by either group of belligerents , the terms upon which they would deem it possible to make peace .
i spoke on behalf of humanity and of the rights of all neutral nations like our own , many of whose most vital interests the war puts in constant jeopardy .
the central powers united in a reply which stated merely that they were ready to meet their antagonists in conference to discuss terms of peace .
the entente powers have replied much more definitely and have stated , in general terms , indeed , but with sufficient definiteness to imply details , the arrangements , guarantees , and acts of reparation which they deem to be the indispensable conditions of a satisfactory settlement .
we are that much nearer a definite discussion of the peace which shall end the present war .
we are that much nearer the discussion of the international concert which must thereafter hold the world at peace .
in every discussion of the peace that must end this war it is taken for granted that that peace must be followed by some definite concert of power which will make it virtually impossible that any such catastrophe should ever overwhelm us again .
every lover of mankind , every sane and thoughtful man must take that for granted .
i have sought this opportunity to address you because i thought that i owed it to you , as the council associated with me in the final determination of our international obligations , to disclose to you without reserve the thought and purpose that have been taking form in my mind in regard to the duty of our government in the days to come when it will be necessary to lay afresh and upon a new plan the foundations of peace among the nations .
it is inconceivable that the people of the united states should play no part in that great enterprise .
to take part in such a service will be the opportunity for which they have sought to prepare themselves by the very principles and purposes of their polity and the approved practices of their government ever since the days when they set up a new nation in the high and honorable hope that it might in all that it was and did show mankind the way to liberty .
they can not in honor withhold the service to which they are now about to be challenged .
they do not wish to withhold it .
but they owe it to themselves and to the other nations of the world to state the conditions under which they will feel free to render it .
that service is nothing less than this , to add their authority and their power to the authority and force of other nations to guarantee peace and justice throughout the world .
such a settlement can not now be long postponed .
it is right that before it comes this government should frankly formulate the conditions upon which it would feel justified in asking our people to approve its formal and solemn adherence to a league for peace .
i am here to attempt to state those conditions .
the present war must first be ended ; but we owe it to candor and to a just regard for the opinion of mankind to say that , so far as our participation in guarantees of future peace is concerned , it makes a great deal of difference in what way and upon what terms it is ended .
the treaties and agreements which bring it to an end must embody terms which will create a peace that is worth guaranteeing and preserving , a peace that will win the approval of mankind , not merely a peace that will serve the several interests and immediate aims of the nations engaged .
we shall have no voice in determining what those terms shall be , but we shall , i feel sure , have a voice in determining whether they shall be made lasting or not by the guarantees of a universal covenant ; and our judgment upon what is fundamental and essential as a condition precedent to permanency should be spoken now , not afterwards when it may be too late .
no covenant of cooperative peace that does not include the peoples of the new world can suffice to keep the future safe against war ; and yet there is only one sort of peace that the peoples of america could join in guaranteeing .
the elements of that peace must be elements that engage the confidence and satisfy the principles of the american governments , elements consistent with their political faith and with the practical convictions which the peoples of america have once for all embraced and undertaken to defend .
i do not mean to say that any american government would throw any obstacle in the way of any terms of peace the governments now at war might agree upon , or seek to upset them when made , whatever they might be .
i only take it for granted that mere terms of peace between the belligerents will not satisfy even the belligerents themselves .
mere agreements may not make peace secure .
it will be absolutely necessary that a force be created as a guarantor of the permanency of the settlement so much greater than the force of any nation now engaged or any alliance hitherto formed or projected that no nation , no probable combination of nations could face or withstand it .
if the peace presently to be made is to endure , it must be a peace made secure by the organized major force of mankind .
the terms of the immediate peace agreed upon will determine whether it is a peace for which such a guarantee can be secured .
the question upon which the whole future peace and policy of the world depends is this : 
 is the present war a struggle for a just and secure peace , or only for a new balance of power ?
if it be only a struggle for a new balance of power , who will guarantee , who can guarantee , the stable equilibrium of the new arrangement ?
only a tranquil europe can be a stable europe .
there must be , not a balance of power , but a community of power ; not organized rivalries , but an organized common peace .
fortunately we have received very explicit assurances on this point .
the statesmen of both of the groups of nations now arrayed against one another have said , in terms that could not be misinterpreted , that it was no part of the purpose they had in mind to crush their antagonists .
but the implications of these assurances may not be equally clear to all?may not be the same on both sides of the water .
i think it will be serviceable if i attempt to set forth what we understand them to be .
they imply , first of all , that it must be a peace without victory .
it is not pleasant to say this .
i beg that i may be permitted to put my own interpretation upon it and that it may be understood that no other interpretation was in my thought .
i am seeking only to face realities and to face them without soft concealments .
victory would mean peace forced upon the loser , a victor 's terms imposed upon the vanquished .
it would be accepted in humiliation , under duress , at an intolerable sacrifice , and would leave a sting , a resentment , a bitter memory upon which terms of peace would rest , not permanently , but only as upon quicksand .
only a peace between equals can last .
only a peace the very principle of which is equality and a common participation in a common benefit .
the right state of mind , the right feeling between nations , is as necessary for a lasting peace as is the just settlement of vexed questions of territory or of racial and national allegiance .
the equality of nations upon which peace must be founded if it is to last must be an equality of rights ; the guarantees exchanged must neither recognize nor imply a difference between big nations and small , between those that are powerful and those that are weak .
right must be based upon the common strength , not upon the individual strength , of the nations upon whose concert peace will depend .
equality of territory or of resources there of course can not be ; nor any other sort of equality not gained in the ordinary peaceful and legitimate development of the peoples themselves .
but no one asks or expects anything more than an equality of rights .
mankind is looking now for freedom of life , not for equipoises of power .
and there is a deeper thing involved than even equality of right among organized nations .
no peace can last , or ought to last , which does not recognize and accept the principle that governments derive all their just powers from the consent of the governed , and that no right anywhere exists to hand peoples about from sovereignty to sovereignty as if they were property .
i take it for granted , for instance , if i may venture upon a single example , that statesmen everywhere are agreed that there should be a united , independent , and autonomous poland , and that henceforth inviolable security of life , of worship , and of industrial and social development should be guaranteed to all peoples who have lived hitherto under the power of governments devoted to a faith and purpose hostile to their own .
i speak of this , not because of any desire to exalt an abstract political principle which has always been held very dear by those who have sought to build up liberty in america , but for the same reason that i have spoken of the other conditions of peace which seem to me clearly indispensable,?because i wish frankly to uncover realities .
any peace which does not recognize and accept this principle will inevitably be upset .
it will not rest upon the affections or the convictions of mankind .
the ferment of spirit of whole populations will fight subtly and constantly against it , and all the world will sympathize .
the world can be at peace only if its life is stable , and there can be no stability where the will is in rebellion , where there is not tranquillity of spirit and a sense of justice , of freedom , and of right .
so far as practicable , moreover , every great people now struggling towards a full development of its resources and of its powers should be assured a direct outlet to the great highways of the sea .
where this can not be done by the cession of territory , it can no doubt be done by the neutralization of direct rights of way under the general guarantee which will assure the peace itself .
with a right comity of arrangement no nation need be shut away from free access to the open paths of the world 's commerce .
and the paths of the sea must alike in law and in fact be free .
the freedom of the seas is the sine qua non of peace , equality , and cooperation .
no doubt a somewhat radical reconsideration of many of the rules of international practice hitherto thought to be established may be necessary in order to make the seas indeed free and common in practically all circumstances for the use of mankind , but the motive for such changes is convincing and compelling .
there can be no trust or intimacy between the peoples of the world without them .
the free , constant , unthreatened intercourse of nations is an essential part of the process of peace and of development .
it need not be difficult either to define or to secure the freedom of the seas if the governments of the world sincerely desire to come to an agreement concerning it .
it is a problem closely connected with the limitation of naval armaments and the cooperation of the navies of the world in keeping the seas at once free and safe .
and the question of limiting naval armaments opens the wider and perhaps more difficult question of the limitation of armies and of all programs of military preparation .
difficult and delicate as these questions are , they must be faced with the utmost candor and decided in a spirit of real accommodation if peace is to come with healing in its wings , and come to stay .
peace can not be had without concession and sacrifice .
there can be no sense of safety and equality among the nations if great preponderating armaments are henceforth to continue here and there to be built up and maintained .
the statesmen of the world must plan for peace and nations must adjust and accommodate their policy to it as they have planned for war and made ready for pitiless contest and rivalry .
the question of armaments , whether on land or sea , is the most immediately and intensely practical question connected with the future fortunes of nations and of mankind .
i have spoken upon these great matters without reserve and with the utmost explicitness because it has seemed to me to be necessary if the world 's yearning desire for peace was anywhere to find free voice and utterance .
perhaps i am the only person in high authority amongst all the peoples of the world who is at liberty to speak and hold nothing back .
i am speaking as an individual , and yet i am speaking also , of course , as the responsible head of a great government , and i feel confident that i have said what the people of the united states would wish me to say .
may i not add that i hope and believe that i am in effect speaking for liberals and friends of humanity in every nation and of every program of liberty ?
i would fain believe that i am speaking for the silent mass of mankind everywhere who have as yet had no place or opportunity to speak their real hearts out concerning the death and ruin they see to have come already upon the persons and the homes they hold most dear .
and in holding out the expectation that the people and government of the united states will join the other civilized nations of the world in guaranteeing the permanence of peace upon such terms as i have named i speak with the greater boldness and confidence because it is clear to every man who can think that there is in this promise no breach in either our traditions or our policy as a nation , but a fulfilment , rather , of all that we have professed or striven for .
i am proposing , as it were , that the nations should with one accord adopt the doctrine of president monroe as the doctrine of the world : that no nation should seek to extend its polity over any other nation or people , but that every people should be left free to determine its own polity , its own way of development , unhindered , unthreatened , unafraid , the little along with the great and powerful .
i am proposing that all nations henceforth avoid entangling alliances which would draw them into competitions of power , catch them in a net of intrigue and selfish rivalry , and disturb their own affairs with influences intruded from without .
there is no entangling alliance in a concert of power .
when all unite to act in the same sense and with the same purpose all act in the common interest and are free to live their own lives under a common protection .
i am proposing government by the consent of the governed ; that freedom of the seas which in international conference after conference representatives of the united states have urged with the eloquence of those who are the convinced disciples of liberty ; and that moderation of armaments which makes of armies and navies a power for order merely , not an instrument of aggression or of selfish violence .
these are american principles , american policies .
we could stand for no others .
and they are also the principles and policies of forward looking men and women everywhere , of every modern nation , of every enlightened community .
they are the principles of mankind and must prevail .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 when i addressed myself to performing the duty laid upon the president by the constitution to present to you an annual report on the state of the union , i found my thought dominated by an immortal sentence of abraham lincoln's-"let us have faith that right makes might , and in that faith let us dare to do our duty as we understand it " -a sentence immortal because it embodies in a form of utter simplicity and purity the essential faith of the nation , the faith in which it was conceived , and the faith in which it has grown to glory and power .
with that faith and the birth of a nation founded upon it came the hope into the world that a new order would prevail throughout the affairs of mankind , an order in which reason and right would take precedence over covetousness and force ; and i believe that i express the wish and purpose of every thoughtful american when i say that this sentence marks for us in the plainest manner the part we should play alike in the arrangement of our domestic affairs and in our exercise of influence upon the affairs of the world .
by this faith , and by this faith alone , can the world be lifted out of its present confusion and despair .
it was this faith which prevailed over the wicked force of germany .
you will remember that the beginning of the end of the war came when the german people found themselves face to face with the conscience of the world and realized that right was everywhere arrayed against the wrong that their government was attempting to perpetrate .
i think , therefore , that it is true to say that this was the faith which won the war .
certainly this is the faith with which our gallant men went into the field and out upon the seas to make sure of victory .
this is the mission upon which democracy came into the world .
democracy is an assertion of the right of the individual to live and to be treated justly as against any attempt on the part of any combination of individuals to make laws which will overburden him or which will destroy his equality among his fellows in the matter of right or privilege ; and i think we all realize that the day has come when democracy is being put upon its final test .
the old world is just now suffering from a wanton rejection of the principle of democracy and a substitution of the principle of autocracy as asserted in the name , but without the authority and sanction , of the multitude .
this is the time of all others when democracy should prove its purity and its spiritual power to prevail .
it is surely the manifest destiny of the united states to lead in the attempt to make this spirit prevail .
there are two ways in which the united states can assist to accomplish this great object .
first , by offering the example within her own borders of the will and power of democracy to make and enforce laws which are unquestionably just and which are equal in their administration - laws which secure its full right to labor and yet at the same time safeguard the integrity of property , and particularly of that property which is devoted to the development of industry and the increase of the necessary wealth of the world .
second , by standing for right and justice as toward individual nations .
the law of democracy is for the protection of the weak , and the influence of every democracy in the world should be for the protection of the weak nation , the nation which is struggling toward its right and toward its proper recognition and privilege in the family of nations .
the united states can not refuse this role of champion without putting the stigma of rejection upon the great and devoted men who brought its government into existence and established it in the face of almost universal opposition and intrigue , even in the face of wanton force , as , for example , against the orders in council of great britain and the arbitrary napoleonic decrees which involved us in what we know as the war of 1812 .
i urge you to consider that the display of an immediate disposition on the part of the congress to remedy any injustices or evils that may have shown themselves in our own national life will afford the most effectual offset to the forces of chaos and tyranny which are playing so disastrous a part in the fortunes of the free peoples of more than one part of the world .
the united states is of necessity the sample democracy of the world , and the triumph of democracy depends upon its success .
recovery from the disturbing and sometimes disastrous effects of the late war has been exceedingly slow on the other side of the water , and has given promise , i venture - to say , of early completion only in our own fortunate country ; but even with us the recovery halts and is impeded at times , and there are immediately serviceable acts of legislation which it seems to me we ought to attempt , to assist that recovery and prove the indestructible recuperative force of a great government of the people .
one of these is to prove that a great democracy can keep house as successfully and in as business - like a fashion as any other government .
it seems to me that the first step toward providing this is to supply ourselves with a systematic method of handling our estimates and expenditures and bringing them to the point where they will not be an unnecessary strain upon our income or necessitate unreasonable taxation ; in other words , a workable budget system .
and i respectfully suggest that two elements are essential to such a system - namely , not only that the proposal of appropriations should be in the hands of a single body , such as a single appropriations committee in each house of the congress , but also that this body should be brought into such cooperation with the departments of the government and with the treasury of the united states as would enable it to act upon a complete conspectus of the needs of the government and the resources from which it must draw its income .
i reluctantly vetoed the budget bill passed by the last session of the congress because of a constitutional objection .
the house of representatives subsequently modified the bill in order to meet this objection .
in the revised form , i believe that the bill , coupled with action already taken by the congress to revise its rules and procedure , furnishes the foundation for an effective national budget system .
i earnestly hope , therefore , that one of the first steps to be taken by the present session of the congress will be to pass the budget bill .
the nation 's finances have shown marked improvement during the last year .
the total ordinary receipts of $ 6,694,000,000 for the fiscal year 1920 exceeded those for 1919 by $ 1,542,000,000 , while the total net ordinary expenditures decreased from $ 18,514,000,000 to $ 6,403,000,000 .
the gross public debt , which reached its highest point on august 31 , 1919 , when it was $ 26,596,000,000 , had dropped on november 30 , 1920 , to $ 24,175,000,000 .
there has also been a marked decrease in holdings of government war securities by the banking institutions of the country , as well as in the amount of bills held by the federal reserve banks secured by government war obligations .
this fortunate result has relieved the banks and left them freer to finance the needs of agriculture , industry , and commerce .
it has been due in large part to the reduction of the public debt , especially of the floating debt , but more particularly to the improved distribution of government securities among permanent investors .
the cessation of the government 's borrowings , except through short - term certificates of indebtedness , has been a matter of great consequence to the people of the country at large , as well as to the holders of liberty bonds and victory notes , and has had an important bearing on the matter of effective credit control .
the year has been characterized by the progressive withdrawal of the treasury from the domestic credit market and from a position of dominant influence in that market .
the future course will necessarily depend upon the extent to which economies are practiced and upon the burdens placed upon the treasury , as well as upon industrial developments and the maintenance of tax receipts at a sufficiently high level .
the fundamental fact which at present dominates the government 's financial situation is that seven and a half billions of its war indebtedness mature within the next two and a half years .
of this amount , two and a half billions are floating debt and five billions , victory notes and war .
savings certificates .
the fiscal program of the government must be determined with reference to these maturities .
sound policy demands that government expenditures be reduced to the lowest amount which will permit the various services to operate efficiently and that government receipts from taxes and salvage be maintained sufficiently high to provide for current requirements , including interest and sinking fund charges on the public debt , and at the same time retire the floating debt and part of the victory loan before maturity .
with rigid economy , vigorous salvage operations , and adequate revenues from taxation , a surplus of current receipts over current expenditures can be realized and should be applied to the floating debt .
all branches of the government should cooperate to see that this program is realized .
i can not overemphasize the necessity of economy in government appropriations and expenditures and the avoidance by the congress of practices which take money from the treasury by indefinite or revolving fund appropriations .
the estimates for the present year show that over a billion dollars of expenditures were authorized by the last congress in addition to the amounts shown in the usual compiled statements of appropriations .
this strikingly illustrates the importance of making direct and specific appropriations .
the relation between the current receipts and current expenditures of the government during the present fiscal year , as well as during the last half of the last fiscal year , has been disturbed by the extraordinary burdens thrown upon the treasury by the transportation act , in connection with the return of the railroads to private control .
over $ 600,000,000 has already been paid to the railroads under this act-$350,000,000 during the present fiscal year ; and it is estimated that further payments aggregating possibly $ 650,000,000 must still be made to the railroads during the current year .
it is obvious that these large payments have already seriously limited the government 's progress in retiring the floating debt .
closely connected with this , it seems to me , is the necessity for an immediate consideration of the revision of our tax laws .
simplification of the income and profits taxes has become an immediate necessity .
these taxes performed an indispensable service during the war .
the need for their simplification , however , is very great , in order to save the taxpayer inconvenience and expense and in order to make his liability more certain and definite .
other and more detailed recommendations with regard to taxes will no doubt be laid before you by the secretary of the treasury and the commissioner of internal revenue .
it is my privilege to draw to the attention of congress for very sympathetic consideration the problem of providing adequate facilities for the care and treatment of former members of the military and naval forces who are sick and disabled as the result of their participation in the war .
these heroic men can never be paid in money for the service they patriotically rendered the nation .
their reward will lie rather in realization of the fact that they vindicated the rights of their country and aided in safeguarding civilization .
the nation 's gratitude must be effectively revealed to them by the most ample provision for their medical care and treatment as well as for their vocational training and placement .
the time has come when a more complete program can be formulated and more satisfactorily administered for their treatment and training , and i earnestly urge that the congress give the matter its early consideration .
the secretary of the treasury and the board for vocational education will outline in their annual reports proposals covering medical care and rehabilitation which i am sure will engage your earnest study and commend your most generous support .
permit me to emphasize once more the need for action upon certain matters upon which i dwelt at some length in my message to the second session of the sixty - sixth congress .
the necessity , for example , of encouraging the manufacture of dyestuffs and related chemicals ; the importance of doing everything possible to promote agricultural production along economic lines , to improve agricultural marketing , and to make rural life more attractive and healthful ; the need for a law regulating cold storage in such a way as to limit the time during which goods may be kept in storage , prescribing the method of disposing of them if kept beyond the permitted period , and requiring goods released from storage in all cases to bear the date of their receipt .
it would also be most serviceable if it were provided that all goods released from cold storage for interstate shipment should have plainly marked upon each package the selling or market price at which they went into storage , in order that the purchaser might be able to learn what profits stood between him and the producer or the wholesale dealer .
indeed , it would be very serviceable to the public if all goods destined for interstate commerce were made to carry upon every packing case whose form made it possible a plain statement of the price at which they left the hands of the producer .
i respectfully call your attention also to the recommendations of the message referred to with regard to a federal license for all corporations engaged in interstate commerce .
in brief , the immediate legislative need of the time is the removal of all obstacles to the realization of the best ambitions of our people in their several classes of employment and the strengthening of all instrumentalities by .
which difficulties are to be met and removed and justice dealt out , whether by law or by some form of mediation and conciliation .
i do not feel it to be my privilege at present to , suggest the detailed and particular methods by which these objects may be attained , but i have faith that the inquiries of your several committees will discover the way and the method .
in response to what i believe to be the impulse of sympathy and opinion throughout the united states , i earnestly suggest that the congress authorize the treasury of the united states to make to the struggling government of armenia such a loan as was made to several of the allied governments during the war , and i would also suggest that it would be desirable to provide in the legislation itself that the expenditure of the money thus loaned should be under the supervision of a commission , or at least a commissioner , from the united states in order that revolutionary tendencies within armenia itself might not be afforded by the loan a further tempting opportunity .
allow me to call your attention to the fact that the people of the philippine islands have succeeded in maintaining a stable government since the last action of the congress in their behalf , and have thus fulfilled the condition set by the congress as precedent to a consideration of granting independence to the islands .
i respectfully submit that this condition precedent having been fulfilled , it is now our liberty and our duty to keep our promise to the people of those islands by granting them the independence which they so honorably covet .
i have not so much laid before you a series of recommendations , gentlemen , as sought to utter a confession of faith , of the faith in which i was bred and which it is my solemn purpose to stand by until my last fighting day .
i believe this to be the faith of america , the faith of the future , and of all the victories which await national action in the days to come , whether in america or elsewhere .

mr. speaker , mr. president , gentlemen of the congress : 
 i am very glad indeed to have this opportunity to address the two houses directly and to verify for myself the impression that the president of the united states is a person , not a mere department of the government hailing congress from some isolated island of jealous power , sending messages , not speaking naturally and with his own voice -- that he is a human being trying to cooperate with other human beings in a common service .
after this pleasant experience i shall feel quite normal in all our dealings with one another .
i have called the congress together in extraordinary session because a duty was laid upon the party now in power at the recent elections which it ought to perform promptly , in order that the burden carried by the people under existing law may be lightened as soon as possible and in order , also , that the business interests of the country may not be kept too long in suspense as to what the fiscal changes are to be to which they will be required to adjust themselves .
it is clear to the whole country that the tariff duties must be altered .
they must be changed to meet the radical alteration in the conditions of our economic life which the country has witnessed within the last generation .
while the whole face and method of our industrial and commercial life were being changed beyond recognition the tariff schedules have remained what they were before the change began , or have moved in the direction they were given when no large circumstance of our industrial development was what it is to - day .
our task is to square them with the actual facts .
the sooner that is done the sooner we shall escape from suffering from the facts and the sooner our men of business will be free to thrive by the law of nature ( the nature of free business ) instead of by the law of legislation and artificial arrangement .
we have seen tariff legislation wander very far afield in our day -- very far indeed from the field in which our prosperity might have had a normal growth and stimulation .
no one who looks the facts squarely in the face or knows anything that lies beneath the surface of action can fail to perceive the principles upon which recent tariff legislation has been based .
we long ago passed beyond the modest notion of " protecting " the industries of the country and moved boldly forward to the idea that they were entitled to the direct patronage of the government .
for a long time -- a time so long that the men now active in public policy hardly remember the conditions that preceded it -- we have sought in our tariff schedules to give each group of manufacturers or producers what they themselves thought that they needed in order to maintain a practically exclusive market as against the rest of the world .
consciously or unconsciously , we have built up a set of privileges and exemptions from competition behind which it was easy by any , even the crudest , forms of combination to organize monopoly ; until at last nothing is normal , nothing is obliged to stand the tests of efficiency and economy , in our world of big business , but everything thrives by concerted arrangement .
only new principles of action will save us from a final hard crystallization of monopoly and a complete loss of the influences that quicken enterprise and keep independent energy alive .
it is plain what those principles must be .
we must abolish everything that bears even the semblance of privilege or of any kind of artificial advantage , and put our business men and producers under the stimulation of a constant necessity to be efficient , economical , and enterprising , masters of competitive supremacy , better workers and merchants than any in the world .
aside from the duties laid upon articles which we do not , and probably can not , produce , therefore , and the duties laid upon luxuries and merely for the sake of the revenues they yield , the object of the tariff duties henceforth laid must be effective competition , the whetting of american wits by contest with the wits of the rest of the world .
it would be unwise to move toward this end headlong , with reckless haste , or with strokes that cut at the very roots of what has grown up amongst us by long process and at our own invitation .
it does not alter a thing to upset it and break it and deprive it of a chance to change .
it destroys it .
we must make changes in our fiscal laws , in our fiscal system , whose object is development , a more free and wholesome development , not revolution or upset or confusion .
we must build up trade , especially foreign trade .
we need the outlet and the enlarged field of energy more than we ever did before .
we must build up industry as well , and must adopt freedom in the place of artificial stimulation only so far as it will build , not pull down .
in dealing with the tariff the method by which this may be done will be a matter of judgment , exercised item by item .
to some not accustomed to the excitements and responsibilities of greater freedom our methods may in some respects and at some points seem heroic , but remedies may be heroic and yet be remedies .
it is our business to make sure that they are genuine remedies .
our object is clear .
if our motive is above just challenge and only an occasional error of judgment is chargeable against us , we shall be fortunate .
we are called upon to render the country a great service in more matters than one .
our responsibility should be met and our methods should be thorough , as thorough as moderate and well considered , based upon the facts as they are , and not worked out as if we were beginners .
we are to deal with the facts of our own day , with the facts of no other , and to make laws which square with those facts .
it is best , indeed it is necessary , to begin with the tariff .
i will urge nothing upon you now at the opening of your session which can obscure that first object or divert our energies from that clearly defined duty .
at a later time i may take the liberty of calling your attention to reforms which should press close upon the heels of the tariff changes , if not accompany them , of which the chief is the reform of our banking and currency laws ; but just now i refrain .
for the present , i put these matters on one side and think only of this one thing -- of the changes in our fiscal system which may best serve to open once more the free channels of prosperity to a great people whom we would serve to the utmost and throughout both rank and file .
i thank you for your courtesy .

gentlemen of the congress : 
 i have again asked the privilege of addressing you because we are moving through critical times during which it seems to me to be my duty to keep in close touch with the houses of congress , so that neither counsel nor action shall run at cross purposes between us .
on the third of february i officially informed you of the sudden and unexpected action of the imperial german government in declaring its intention to disregard the promises it had made to this government in april last and undertake immediate submarine operations against all commerce , whether of belligerents or of neutrals , that should seek to approach great britain and ireland , the atlantic coasts of europe , or the harbors of the eastern mediterranean , and to conduct those operations without regard to the established restrictions of international practice , without regard to any considerations of humanity even which might interfere with their object .
that policy was forthwith put into practice .
it has now been in active execution for nearly four weeks .
its practical results are not yet fully disclosed .
the commerce of other neutral nations is suffering severely , but not , perhaps , very much more severely than it was already suffering before the first of february , when the new policy of the imperial government was put into operation .
we have asked the cooperation of the other neutral governments to prevent these depredations , but so far none of them has thought it wise to join us in any common course of action .
our own commerce has suffered , is suffering , rather in apprehension than in fact , rather because so many of our ships are timidly keeping to their home ports than because american ships have been sunk .
two american vessels have been sunk , the housatonic and the lyman m. law .
the case of the housatonic , which was carrying food - stuffs consigned to a london firm , was essentially like the case of the fry , in which , it will be recalled , the german government admitted its liability for damages , and the lives of the crew , as in the case of the fry , were safeguarded with reasonable care .
the case of the law , which was carrying lemon - box staves to palermo , disclosed a ruthlessness of method which deserves grave condemnation , but was accompanied by no circumstances which might not have been expected at any time in connection with the use of the submarine against merchantmen as the german government has used it .
in sum , therefore , the situation we find ourselves in with regard to the actual conduct of the german submarine warfare against commerce and its effects upon our own ships and people is substantially the same that it was when i addressed you on the third of february , except for the tying up of our shipping in our own ports because of the unwillingness of our shipowners to risk their vessels at sea without insurance or adequate protection , and the very serious congestion of our commerce which has resulted , a congestion which is growing rapidly more and more serious every day .
this in itself might presently accomplish , in effect , what the new german submarine orders were meant to accomplish , so far as we are concerned .
we can only say , therefore , that the overt act which i have ventured to hope the german commanders would in fact avoid has not occurred .
but , while this is happily true , it must be admitted that there have been certain additional indications and expressions of purpose on the part of the german press and the german authorities which have increased rather than lessened the impression that , if our ships and our people are spared , it will be because of fortunate circumstances or because the commanders of the german submarines which they may happen to encounter exercise an unexpected discretion and restraint rather than because of the instructions under which those commanders are acting .
it would be foolish to deny that the situation is fraught with the gravest possibilities and dangers .
no thoughtful man can fail to see that the necessity for definite action may come at any time , if we are in fact , and not in word merely , to defend our elementary rights as a neutral nation .
it would be most imprudent to be unprepared .
i can not in such circumstances be unmindful of the fact that the expiration of the term of the present congress is immediately at hand , by constitutional limitation ; and that it would in all likelihood require an unusual length of time to assemble and organize the congress which is to succeed it .
i feel that i ought , in view of that fact , to obtain from you full and immediate assurance of the authority which i may need at any moment to exercise .
no doubt i already possess that authority without special warrant of law , by the plain implication of my constitutional duties and powers ; but i prefer , in the present circumstances , not to act upon general implication .
i wish to feel that the authority and the power of the congress are behind me in whatever it may become necessary for me to do .
we are jointly the servants of the people and must act together and in their spirit , so far as we can divine and interpret it .
no one doubts what it is our duty to do .
we must defend our commerce and the lives of our people in the midst of the present trying circumstances , with discretion but with clear and steadfast purpose .
only the method and the extent remain to be chosen , upon the occasion , if occasion should indeed arise .
since it has unhappily proved impossible to safeguard our neutral rights by diplomatic means against the unwarranted infringements they are suffering at the hands of germany , there may be no recourse but to armed neutrality , which we shall know how to maintain and for which there is abundant american precedent .
it is devoutly to be hoped that it will not be necessary to put armed force anywhere into action .
the american people do not desire it , and our desire is not different from theirs .
i am sure that they will understand the spirit in which i am now acting , the purpose i hold nearest my heart and would wish to exhibit in everything i do .
i am anxious that the people of the nations at war also should understand and not mistrust us .
i hope that i need give no further proofs and assurances than i have already given throughout nearly three years of anxious patience that i am the friend of peace and mean to preserve it for america so long as i am able .
i am not now proposing or contemplating war or any steps that need lead to it .
i merely request that you will accord me by your own vote and definite bestowal the means and the authority to safeguard in practice the right of a great people who are at peace and who are desirous of exercising none but the rights of peace to follow the pursuits of peace in quietness and good will , -- rights recognized time out of mind by all the civilized nations of the world .
no course of my choosing or of theirs will lead to war .
war can come only by the wilful acts and aggressions of others .
you will understand why i can make no definite proposals or forecasts of action now and must ask for your supporting authority in the most general terms .
the form in which action may become necessary can not yet be foreseen .
i believe that the people will be willing to trust me to act with restraint , with prudence , and in the true spirit of amity and good faith that they have themselves displayed throughout these trying months ; and it is in that belief that i request that you will authorize me to supply our merchant ships with defensive arms , should that become necessary , and with the means of using them , and to employ any other instrumentalities or methods that may be necessary and adequate to protect our ships and our people in their legitimate and peaceful pursuits on the seas .
i request also that you will grant me at the same time , along with the powers i ask , a sufficient credit to enable me to provide adequate means of protection where they are lacking , including adequate insurance against the present war risks .
i have spoken of our commerce and of the legitimate errands of our people on the seas , but you will not be misled as to my main thought , the thought that lies beneath these phrases and gives them dignity and weight .
it is not of material interests merely that we are thinking .
it is , rather , of fundamental human rights , chief of all the right of life itself .
i am thinking , not only of the rights of americans to go and come about their proper business by way of the sea , but also of something much deeper , much more fundamental than that .
i am thinking of those rights of humanity without which there is no civilization .
my theme is of those great principles of compassion and of protection which mankind has sought to throw about human lives , the lives of non - combatants , the lives of men who are peacefully at work keeping the industrial processes of the world quick and vital , the lives of women and children and of those who supply the labor which ministers to their sustenance .
we are speaking of no selfish material rights but of rights which our hearts support and whose foundation is that righteous passion for justice upon which all law , all structures alike of family , of state , and of mankind must rest , as upon the ultimate base of our existence and our liberty .
i can not imagine any man with american principles at his heart hesitating to defend these things .

